                                                                                          Attachment B

R I G O R • R E L E VA N C E • R E L AT I O N S H I P S • R I G O R • R E L E VA N C E • R E L AT I O N S H I P S • R I G O R
• R E L E VA N C E • R E L AT I O N S H I P S • R I G O R • R E L E VA N C E • R E L A T I O N S H I P S • R I G O R • R E L
R E L A T I O N S H I P S • R I G O R • R E L E VA N C E R E L A T I O N S H I P S • R I G O R • R E L E VA N C E •
•R I G O R • R E L E V A N C E • R E L A T I O N S H I P S • R I G O R • R E L E V A N C E • R E L A T I O N S H I P S • R I G
 R E L E V A N C E • R E L A T I O N S H I P S • R I G O R • R E L E V A N C E •R E L A T I O N S H I P S • R I G O R • R E L E




                                                Michigan K-12 Standards
                                                Social Studies
2
                                                        CONTENTS

    The Goals of Social Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

    Michigan’s Grade Level Content Expectations for Social Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

    Using the K-8 Social Studies GLCE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

    The Social Studies Standard and Michigan Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

    K-2 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

    The Arc of Inquiry and Social Studies Process and Skills: Grades K-2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

    3-5 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26

    The Arc of Inquiry and Social Studies Process and Skills: Grades 3-5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27

    6-8 Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50

    The Arc of Inquiry and Social Studies Process and Skills: Grades 6-8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51

    World Geography: Grade 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53

    Social Studies Content Expectations: Grade 6. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54

    World History and Geography: Grade 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66

    Integrated United States History: Grade 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76

    The Arc of Inquiry and Social Studies Process and Skills: Grades 9-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86

    Michigan’s Grade Level Content Expectations for Social Studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88

    High School World History and Geography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89

    The Arc of Inquiry and Social Studies Process and Skills: Grades 9-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . .100

    High School United States History and Geography. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .102

    The Arc of Inquiry and Social Studies Process and Skills: Grades 9-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . .118

    High School Civics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .120

    The Arc of Inquiry and Social Studies Process and Skills: Grades 9-12 . . . . . . . . . . . . .134

    High School Economics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .136




Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                   		                     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                3
                                THE GOALS OF SOCIAL STUDIES

   Introduction
   Michigan’s Social Studies Content Expectations describe what students should know and be able to do
   in order to succeed in college, career, and civic life. In 2013, the State of Michigan began revising the
   content expectations and involved educators from local, ISD, university, and state-level organizations.
   The project was focused on updating the existing 2007 standards around the charge of “clearer, fewer,
   and higher” and the result of this work is presented here.
   Writing teams met on a regular basis throughout the revision process and several opportunities for
   public review and commentary were provided. Sessions took place around the state in 2015, 2018,
   and again in 2019. As a result, a diverse representation of Michigan’s educators and citizens provided
   additional feedback, which was used to shape the final version of this document.
   This document is not intended to be a state curriculum. The revised content in the standards is coupled
   with the Arc of Inquiry and skills delineated in the C3 Framework. In a “local control” state such as
   Michigan, each district can use the document as it sees fit to revise curriculum and create a foundation
   from which it can continue to improve instruction.


   Purpose of Social Studies
   The purpose of social studies is to promote the knowledge, skills, intellectual processes, and
   dispositions required of people to be actively engaged in fulfilling their responsibility of civic
   participation. As members of a culturally diverse, democratic society in an interdependent world,
   young people need to learn how to make informed and reasoned decisions for the public good. Social
   studies fosters a renewed and reinvigorated commitment to the ideal, “government of the people,
   by the people, and for the people,” as expressed by President Lincoln in his Gettysburg Address. The
   expectations outlined below are designed to fulfill that purpose.


   Literacy in Social Studies
   The digital revolution has fostered a sizable shift not only in how students acquire information, but
   how educators make social studies more relevant and meaningful. Teachers are welcoming into their
   classrooms students who have grown up in a world where multiple modes of communication and
   interaction are an indispensable part of everyday life. Instant communication has made distances
   between locations practically invisible; the pace of change is now at a staggering rate, and there is a
   sizable and expanding role of civic participation. As a result, students need to be equipped with a more
   sophisticated level of literacy than ever before — one that transcends basic technical and functional
   knowledge and skills.
   For many, literacy means different things from a wide variety of perspectives. One constant, however,
   is that the notion of literacy is often associated with the mastery of the technical skills of oral and
   written communication, dialogue, and questioning. Today’s society demands an urgent need to move
   beyond content-based teaching and the application of discipline-specific skill sets (e.g., thinking like a
   historian, geographer, economist). Critical literacy is the next cerebral step as students move toward
   an approach to see and “read” themselves and the world.
   Embedded in literacy practices, critical literacy provides opportunities for students to utilize an
   integrated approach. Critical literacy has been defined as “learning to read and write as part of the
   process of becoming conscious of one’s experiences as historically constructed within specific power
   relations” (Anderson & Irvine, 1982). In simpler terms, critical literacy is about how students evaluate
   society and possess the necessary abilities and the desire to interact with the world. The combined
   approach of the skill sets of disciplinary literacy along with the tools of critical literacy for critical
   thinking empowers students with multiple perspectives and questioning habits. It encourages them to
   think and take informed action on their decisions through dialogue, civic participation, and their daily
   decisions about how to live so that they can help make their world better.




Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		           		                  MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
4
    The Responsibilities of Civic Participation
    Responsible citizenship requires active participation in our
    communities. Therefore, social studies instruction should
    engage students so they simultaneously learn about civic
    participation while being involved in the civic life of their                             Responsible Citizenship
    communities, our state, and our nation. Social studies
    prepares students to participate in political life, to serve




                                                                                                                          Participation
                                                                                   Disciplinary




                                                                                                             Democratic
                                                                                   Knowledge
    their communities, and to conduct themselves responsibly.




                                                                                                  Thinking




                                                                                                               Values
                                                                                                   Skills




                                                                                                                             Civic
    Being a responsible student in and beyond the classroom
    means:
           • Using knowledge of the past to construct
               meaningful understanding of our diverse cultural
               heritage and inform their civic judgments.                                   History            Geography
               (Historical Perspective)                                                      Civics            Economics
           • Using knowledge of spatial patterns on earth to
               understand processes that shape both the natural environments and the diverse societies that
               inhabit them. (Geographic Perspective)
           • Understanding American government and politics to make informed decisions about governing
              and their community. (Civic Perspective)
           • Using knowledge of the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services
               to make personal, career, and societal decisions about the use of resources. (Economic
               Perspective)
           • Using methods of social science investigation to answer questions about society. (Inquiry)
           • Knowing how, when, and where to construct and express reasoned positions on public issues.
              (Public Discourse and Decision Making)
           • Acting constructively to further the public good (Civic Participation)



    THE C3 FRAMEWORK ARC OF INQUIRY                                  The College, Career, and Civic Life (C3)
                                                                     Framework
Dimension 1: Developing Questions and                                The College, Career, and Civic Life (C3) Framework
          Planning Inquiries
                                                                     was developed by more than twenty-six state
                                                                     agencies and social studies organizations over
          Dimension 2: Applying Disciplinary
                                                                     the course of several years. It introduces an Arc
                 Concepts and Tools                                  of Inquiry that a teacher may find valuable when
                                                                     planning social studies instruction. Inquiry, as
                                                                     an instructional practice, can be a powerful tool
                    Dimension 3: Evaluating Sources and              for local- or site-level curriculum planning and
                              Using Evidence
                                                                     development, or for teachers in refining their
                                                                     practice.
                            Dimension 4: Communicating Conclusions
                                   and Taking Informed Action
                                                                     The Guiding Principles of the C3 Framework
                                                                     The following principles about high-quality social
                                                                     studies education guided the development of the
    C3 Provides a lens for reviewing                                 C3 Framework.

    Michigan Social Studies Content                                  Social studies prepares the nation’s young people
                                                                     for college, careers, and civic life. The third “C” —
              Standards                                              representing civic life — is an essential component
                                                                     of preparation for the future of the United States.



Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                        		                  MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                  5
 It is in the K-12 social studies classrooms that the youth comprising our future will learn about civil
 discourse, the history of our families, schools, communities, state, nation and world, and how to be a
 productive member of society.
 Inquiry is at the heart of social studies. It is through identification of questions and problems, studying
 various disciplinary lenses, learning to use and evaluate sources and evidence, and communicating
 possible conclusions that students can be prepared to face the challenges of the modern world.
 Social studies is composed of deep and enduring understandings, concepts, and skills from the disciplines.
 From studying questions like “Who makes up a community?” to grappling with bigger issues like “Can one
 person change the world?”, the acquisition of both content knowledge and skills is essential.
 Social studies emphasizes skills and practices as preparation for democratic decision making. Strong
 content knowledge, like the standards outlined in the Michigan Social Studies Standards, is only one part
 of preparing students for life beyond the walls of a school. That content knowledge must be coupled with
 strong, foundational skills that prepare students to navigate a complex and ever-changing world.
 Social studies education should have direct and explicit connections to other standards, both local and
 national. The Michigan Social Studies Standards outline content that can be further developed at the local
 level with the addition of local examples. By including portions of the C3 Framework alongside Michigan’s
 revised standards, districts now have a blueprint for the integration of literacy, social studies content, and
 other disciplines such as science, art, and the humanities.


 The Critical Component: Instructional Shifts of the Frameworks
 The C3 Framework represents a substantial shift in the way that social studies was most commonly taught
 in the past. To meet the changing needs of students in the Information Age, and to prepare them for the
 challenges of a dynamic world environment, the following instructional shifts are necessary:
       1. Inquiry should be a primary form of instruction in all social studies classes.
       2. Students (and teachers) should craft investigative questions that matter.
       3. Teachers should establish a collaborative context to support student inquiry.
       4. Teachers should integrate content and skills meaningfully and in a rigorous manner.
       5. Teachers should help students articulate disciplinary literacy practices and outcomes (thinking,
          reading, writing, speaking like a historian, like a geographer, like an economist, etc.).
       6. Teachers should provide, and help students develop, tangible opportunities to take informed
          action.
 Inquiry can be a powerful tool for teaching the content outlined in Michigan’s Grade Level Content
 Expectations. As humans, we are naturally prone to questioning as we try to make sense of the world
 around us. While the C3 Framework is not assessed on state-level assessments, such as the M-STEP, it
 provides guidance for teachers and students on how to practice structured inquiry at the classroom level.
 It is set up around an instructional arc outlined below, with more information available by downloading
 the full document from the National Council for the Social Studies. A full copy of the C3 Framework can be
 found online.
 Inquiry Arc
 The inquiry arc highlights the structure of and rationale for the organization of the C3 Framework’s four
 dimensions. The arc focuses on the nature of inquiry in general and the pursuit of knowledge through
 questions in particular. The C3 Framework, alongside the Michigan Social Studies Content Expectations,
 connect with the Michigan ELA Standards.
 Dimensions and Subsections
 The C3 Framework is organized into the four dimensions, which support a robust social studies program
 rooted in inquiry.
 Dimensions 2, 3, and 4 are further broken down into subsections. For example, Dimension 2, Applying



Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		           		                  MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
6
    Disciplinary Concepts and Tools, includes four subsections, one for each of the major social studies
    disciplines — civics, economics, geography, and history — which include descriptions of the structure and
    tools of the disciplines as well as the habits of mind common in those disciplines.

          Dimension 1:              Dimension 2:                Dimension 3:               Dimension 4:
      Developing Questions       Applying Disciplinary     Evaluating Sources and        Communicating
      and Planning Inquiries      Concepts and Tools           Using Evidence         Conclusions and Taking
                                                                                         Informed Action
    Developing Compelling      Civics                     Gathering and Evaluating Communicating and
    and Supporting                                        Sources                  Critiquing Conclusions
    Questions and Planning     Economics
    Inquiries                                             Developing Claims and      Taking Informed Action
                               Geography                  Using Evidence

                               History


    Unique Structure of Dimension 2
    Dimension 2 has an additional layer of three to four categories within each disciplinary subsection. These
    categories provide an organizing mechanism for the foundational content and skills within each discipline.
    For example, within the subsection of economics, there are four categories: (1) Economic Decision
    Making; (2) Exchange and Markets; (3) The National Economy; and (4) The Global Economy.

             CIVICS                     ECONOMICS               GEOGRAPHY                   HISTORY
    Civic and Political        Economic Decision          Geographic                 Change, Continuity, and
    Institutions               Making                     Representations: Spatial   Context
                                                          Views of the World
    Participation and          Exchange and Markets                                  Perspectives
    Deliberation: Applying                                Human-Environment
    Civic Virtues and          The National Economy       Interaction: Place,        Historical Sources and
    Democratic Principles                                 Regions, and Culture       Evidence
                               The Global Economy
    Processes, Rules, and                                 Human Population:          Causation and
    Laws                                                  Spatial Patterns and       Argumentation
                                                          Movements

                                                          Global Interconnections:
                                                          Changing Spatial
                                                          Patterns




Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		            		                 MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                7

                MICHIGAN’S GRADE LEVEL CONTENT EXPECTATIONS
                             FOR SOCIAL STUDIES
 MICHIGAN’S SOCIAL STUDIES STANDARDS
 The purpose of social studies instruction is to develop social understanding and civic efficacy. The Grade
 Level Content Expectations (GLCE) balance disciplinary content with processes and skills that contribute to
 responsible citizenship and form a foundation for high school social studies coursework.
 The disciplinary knowledge found in this document can be used by students to construct meaning through
 understanding of powerful ideas drawn from the disciplines of history, geography, civics and government,
 and economics.
 Effective social studies instruction and assessment incorporate methods of inquiry, involve public discourse
 and decision making, and provide opportunities for citizen involvement. These methods in the updated
 standards fit well with the four dimensions of the C3 Framework.
 The K-12 Social Studies GLCE was revised to meet these goals:
 Increasing rigor and ensuring they were challenging enough to equip students with necessary skills to
 succeed at the next grade level, while still representing the essential core content of a discipline.
 Providing more clarity to teachers and educational stakeholders. Standards need to be widely understood
 and accepted by teachers, parents, school boards, and others who have a stake in the quality of schooling.
 Specific enough to provide sufficient detail for districts who are developing curricula and teachers
 planning instruction, while providing enough focus to delineate which facts, concepts, and skills should be
 emphasized at each grade level.
 Moving from simple to complex, from concrete to abstract, the Michigan standards needed to clearly
 delineate a progression of both knowledge and skills across grade levels, with each grade level providing a
 brick on the road toward mastery of the high school content.
 Reflecting a coherent structure of the discipline and/or revealing significant relationships among the
 strands, as appropriate.
 Accurate enough for all Michigan students to see themselves.

 UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL STUDIES GLCE CODING
 In use since the 2007 standards, each social studies GLCE code is made up of four parts: the grade, the
 standard category, the standard, and the expectation. In grades K-4, the “standard category” is described
 by discipline; in grades 5 through high school, “standard category” is described by topic. As a result, K-4
 expectations are organized using the standard categories, and do not use the standard codes listed in the
 K-12 organizational chart.

                        6 – E2.3.1
                        Grade      Standard Category   Standard Expectation

 K-4 expectations are organized by discipline and standard category, standard, and expectation.
 Kindergarten example: K – G1.0.2 = Kindergarten, 1st Geography Standard Category, 2nd Expectation
 4th Grade example: 4 – C5.0.3 = Grade 4, 5th Civics Standard Category, 3rd Expectation
 (The “0” is used as a place holder and indicates that K-4 expectations are organized using the standard
 categories, and do not use the standard codes listed in the K-12 organizational chart).
 5th and 8th grades focus on an integrated study of United States history. The expectations are organized
 by U.S. History and Geography (USHG) era. The code indicates the era, the standard, and the expectation.
 5th Grade example: 5 – U3.2.1 = Grade 5, 3rd USHG Era, 2nd Standard, 1st Expectation
 6th and 7th grades focus on an integrated study of the world. The expectations are organized by discipline
 and standard category (or World History and Geography [WHG] era), standard, and expectation.



Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		          		                 MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
8
    6th Grade example: 6 – G4.4.1 = Grade 6, 4th Geography Standard Category, 4th Standard, 1st
    Expectation
    7th Grade example: 7 – W2.1.5 = Grade 7, 2nd WHG Era, 1st Standard, 5th Expectation


    MICHIGAN’S PROCESS AND SKILLS STANDARDS
    Michigan’s Process and Skills Standards identify the inquiry, communication, evaluation, and decision-
    making abilities that can be developed in all disciplines and at many grade levels. Local districts and
    teachers integrate work on inquiry processes and communication skills throughout the curriculum in ways
    that best respond to the needs of the district’s children.
    Michigan’s Process and Skills Standards align well with the C3 Arc of Inquiry, as shown below:



                 THE C3 FRAMEWORK ARC OF INQUIRY
        Dimension 1: Develop     Dimension 2: Apply Disciplinary Concepts and      Dimension 4: Communicate Conclusions
         Questions and Plan                         Tools                                and Take Informed Action
           Investigations       Dimension 3: Evaluate Sources and Use Evidence


       P2: Inquiry,             P1: Reading and Communication P3: Public Discourse and
       Research, and            – Read and communicate        Decision Making
       Analysis                 effectively                   P4 Citizen Involvement
       P2.1 Apply methods of    P1.1 Use appropriate strategies to read and      P3.2 Discuss public policy issues,
       inquiry to investigate   analyze social science tables, graphs, graphics, clarifying issues, considering opposing
       social scientific        maps, and texts.                                 views, applying Democratic Values or
       problems.                                                                 Constitutional Principles, and refining
                                P1.2 Interpret primary and secondary source      claims.
       P3.1 Clearly state an    documents for point of view, context, bias, and
       issue as a question of   frame of reference.                              P3.3 Construct arguments expressing
       public policy, gather                                                     and justifying decisions on public policy
       and interpret            P1.4 Express social studies ideas clearly in     issues.
       information about the    written, spoken, and graphic forms.
       issue, analyze various                                                    P4.1 Act out of respect for the rule of law
       perspectives, and        P1.5 Present an argument supported with          and hold others accountable to the same
       generate and evaluate    evidence.                                        standard.
       possible alternative
       solutions.               P2: Inquiry, Research, and                       P4.2 Assess options for individuals and
                                                                                 groups to plan and conduct activities
                                Analysis                                         intended to advance views on matters of
                                                                                 public policy.
                                P2.2 Evaluate data presented in social science
                                tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and texts.     P4.3 Plan, conduct, and evaluate the
                                                                               effectiveness of activities intended to
                                P2.3 Find, organize, and interpret information advance views on matters of public
                                from a variety of sources.                     policy.
                                P2.4 Use resources from multiple perspectives
                                to analyze issues.




                   MICHIGAN CONTENT EXPECTATIONS
    Michigan Process and Skills Standards have been changed from the 2007 standards in several ways. First,
    they are fewer and clearer to provide teachers with more focused guidelines. Second, Process and Skill
    Standards have now been included for elementary, middle school, and high school in a developmentally
    appropriate manner instead of just for high school. Last, they specifically include the development of
    compelling and supporting questions.




Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                    		                     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9

                                                                        USING THE SOCIAL STUDIES GLCE

     SEQUENCE OF STUDY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WORLD HISTORY            AP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AND GEOGRAPHY          COURSES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Eras 4-8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1 Credit Required        OTHER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SOCIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       U.S. HISTORY AND         STUDIES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GEOGRAPHY            ELECTIVES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Eras 6-9)




                                                                                                 INTEGRATED UNITED STATES HISTORY




                                                                                                                                                                                    INTEGRATED UNITED STATES HISTORY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1 Credit Required




                                                                                                                                                      WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CIVICS
                                                                         UNITED STATES STUDIES                                                                                                                         .5 Credit Required

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ECONOMICS
                              THE LOCAL COMMUNITY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .5 Credit Required




                                                                                                                                    WORLD GEOGRAPHY
                                                     MICHIGAN STUDIES
                 FAMILIES &
      MYSELF &




                 SCHOOLS
      OTHERS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3 Credits as Required   Electives

       K            1         2                      3                      4                    5                                  6                 7                                8                                      HIGH SCHOOL

   Several considerations are important as teachers use the GLCE to plan instruction.
   Integrate acquisition of content (in the GLCE) with process and skill development. Development of
   basic skills in interpreting text, data, graphs, and maps in elementary and middle schools is important
   for success in high school. Development of basic citizenship and discussion skills, while never tested on
   state exams, is nonetheless critical for success in and out of high school.
   Active social studies inquiry is essential. The Arc of Inquiry from College, Career, and Civic Life (C3)
   is a description of a process that helps students develop the kind of reasoned and informed decision–
   making skills needed for active participation in American society. Using the Arc of Inquiry begins
   with the development of compelling questions. Exemplars for the use of compelling questions will be
   included in the instructional material being developed to accompany the revised standards.
   The GLCE is a content guide, not a curriculum organizer; it does not specify lessons, units, or a
   curriculum sequence. World Geography can be taught regionally or thematically. History can be taught
   past to present, or present to past. One teacher may develop a community activity at the beginning
   of the year to help develop a sense of purpose, and another might wait until year’s end as part of a
   capstone project.
   On numerous occasions, the expectations will include examples to help clarify teachable content.
   These specific examples are suggestions. Educators may use other examples to meet the expectations
   or to guide instruction and the creation of a local curriculum and resources. Specific examples included
   for each standard are clearly labeled underneath each standard by using the language “examples may
   include but are not limited to.” These examples are not assessable outside of a stimulus text on state
   summative assessments. The focus of a state assessment question will be the language and content
   delineated in the content expectation itself. In the example below, the content standard is about the
   origins of the American education system. Benjamin Franklin, Benjamin Rush, Noah Webster, and
   Horace Mann are just four of the many examples that could be used when teaching the standard.

     8 – U4.3.1                                     Explain the origins of the American education system.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: Benjamin Franklin, Benjamin
     Rush, Noah Webster, and Horace Mann.




Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                                                                                                              		                                                               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
10
     THE SOCIAL STUDIES STANDARDS AND MICHIGAN LAW:

     Michigan Public Act No. 170 of 2016 states:
     “Beginning in the 2016-2017 school year, the board of a school district or board of directors of a public
     school academy shall ensure that the school district’s or public school academy’s social studies curriculum
     for grades 8 to 12 includes age- and grade-appropriate instruction about genocide, including, but not
     limited to, the Holocaust and the Armenian Genocide. The legislature recommends a combined total of 6
     hours of this instruction during grades 8 to 12.”

     Careful attention, review, and revision work was conducted to ensure that the mandate of Public Act
     No. 170 of 2016 was met with the revisions to the Michigan K-12 Standards for Social Studies. The law
     also states that genocide instruction may take place over time, between grade levels, and across classes
     and disciplines. A student may read a compelling novel such as Night by Elie Wiesel and learn about the
     Holocaust in both the context of their English/Language Arts class and either their high school World
     History and Geography Course (HS-WHG 7.2.3, 7.2.6) or their high school United States History and
     Geography course (HS-US 7.2.4). A student may also study the Armenian Genocide in both courses, with
     complementary social studies instruction found in HS-WHG 7.2.1 and 7.2.6.

     Opportunities to meet the requirement of this law exist both within the confines of the revised Michigan
     K-12 Standards for Social Studies and beyond the boundaries of the social studies classroom.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		            		                  MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                           11
                                                K-2 OVERVIEW


                                            K-2 Grade-Specific Contexts
Kindergarten      Myself and      Using a familiar context for five- and six-year-olds, kindergarteners learn about
                   Others         the social studies disciplines (history, geography, civics and government, and
                                  economics) through the lens of “Myself and Others.”
     1st         Families and     Students continue to explore the social studies disciplines of history, geography,
                   Schools        civics and government, and economics through an integrated approach using the
                                  context of school and families. This is the students’ first introduction to social
                                  institutions.
     2nd           The Local      Students continue the integrative approach to social studies through the context of
                  Community       the local community. Students are introduced to a social environment larger than
                                  their immediate surroundings.

                                         K-2 Social Studies Overview Chart
   History            Geography                  Civics and               Economics               Public Discourse,
                                                Government                                        Decision Making,
                                                                                                     and Citizen
                                                                                                    Involvement
Living and       The World in            Purposes of                  Market Economy         Identifying and
Working          Spatial Terms           Government                                          Analyzing Public Issues
                                                                      Use fundamental
Together         Use geographic          Explain why people create    principles and         Clearly state a problem
Use historical   representations to      governments.                 concepts of            as a public policy
thinking to      acquire, process, and                                economics to           issue, analyze various
                                         Democratic Values
understand       report information                                   understand             perspectives, and
                                         and Constitutional
the past in      from a spatial                                       economic activity in   generate and evaluate
                                         Principles of American
the local        perspective.                                         a market economy.      possible alternative
                                         Government
community.                                                                                   resolutions.
                 Places and Regions
                                         Understand Democratic
                 Understand how                                                              Persuasive
                                         Values and Constitutional
                 regions are created                                                         Communication
                                         Principles of American
                 from common             government.                                         Communicate a reasoned
                 physical and human                                                          position on a public issue.
                                         Structure and Function
                 characteristics.
                                         of Government
                 Human Systems                                                               Civic Participation
                                       Describe the structure
                                                                                             Act constructively to
                 Understand how        of government in the
                                                                                             further the public good.
                 human activities help United States and how it
                 shape the Earth’s     functions.
                 surface.
                                       Civic Participation
                 Environment and
                                       Explain important
                 Society
                                       rights and how, when,
                 Understand the        and where people
                 effects of human-     can demonstrate
                 environment           their responsibilities
                 interactions.         by participating in
                                       government.
12
                                       THE ARC OF INQUIRY: GRADES K-2
     Dimension 1: Developing Questions and Planning Inquiries Central to a rich social studies experience is
     the capability for developing questions that can frame and advance an inquiry. Those questions come in two forms:
     compelling and supporting questions.
     Individually and collaboratively, students construct compelling questions and:
           • explain why the compelling question is important to students.
           • identify disciplinary ideas associated with a compelling question.
           • identify facts and concepts associated with a compelling question.
           • make connections between supporting questions and compelling questions.
           • determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions.
     Dimension 2: Applying Disciplinary Concepts and Tools The four disciplines within social studies provide the
     intellectual context for studying how humans have interacted with each other and with the environment over time.
     Each of these disciplines — civics, economics, geography, and history — offers a unique way of thinking and organizing
     knowledge as well as systems for verifying knowledge. Dimension 2 focuses on the disciplinary concepts and tools
     students need to understand and apply as they study the specific content described in Michigan’s state standards.
     Dimension 3: Evaluating Sources and Using Evidence Dimension 3 includes the skills students need to analyze
     information and come to conclusions in an inquiry. These skills focus on gathering and evaluating sources, and then
     developing claims and using evidence to support these claims.
     Individually and collaboratively, students:
           • gather relevant information from one or two sources while using the origin and structure to guide their selection.
           • evaluate a source by distinguishing between fact and opinion.
     Dimension 4: Communicating Conclusions and Taking Informed Action Students should construct and
     communicate claims for a variety of purposes and audiences. These audiences may range from the school classroom to
     the larger public community.
     Individually and collaboratively, students:
           • construct an argument with reasons.
           • construct explanations using correct sequence and relevant information.
           • present a summary of an argument using print, oral, and digital technologies.
           • ask and answer questions about arguments.
           • ask and answer questions about explanations.
           • identify and explain a range of local, regional, and global problems and some ways in which people are trying to
               address these problems.
           • identify ways to take action and help address local, regional, and global problems.
           • use listening, consensus building, and voting procedures to decide on and take action in their classrooms.
                                       Sample K-2 Compelling and Supporting Questions
       Kindergarten    How do we     1) Why do I have rules at home and at school?
                      get along with
                                     2) Why can’t I have everything I want?
                         others?
                                     3) What are some fair ways to make decisions in a group?
                                        Standards connections: K – C1.0.1, K – C2.0.2, K – C5.0.1
            1st           Why is it     1) What historical sources can you use to learn about family and school life in the
                       important to     past?
                        learn about     2) What conclusions can you draw about family life in the past?
                         the past?
                                        3) What conclusions can you draw about school life in the past?
                                        Standards connections: 1 – H2.0.1, 1 – H2.0.2, 1 – H2.0.3, 1 – H2.0.4
           2nd            How do        1) How does scarcity affect people?
                       people work
                                        2) How can people make good economic choices?
                       together in a
                       community?       3) How do people use resources to produce goods and services?
                                        4) Why do people trade?
                                        Standards connections: 2 – E1.0.2, 2 – E1.0.3, 2 – E1.0.4, 2 – E1.0.5

 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                    		                   MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                           13

          SOCIAL STUDIES PROCESS AND SKILLS STANDARDS K-2


P1 READING AND COMMUNICATION – READ AND COMMUNICATE EFFECTIVELY
P1.1 Use appropriate strategies to read and interpret basic social science tables, graphs, graphics,
maps, and texts.
P1.2 Differentiate between primary and secondary source documents.
P1.3 Express social science ideas or information in written, spoken, and graphic forms including tables,
line graphs, bar graphs, and maps.
P1.4 Identify point of view and bias.

P2 INQUIRY, RESEARCH, AND ANALYSIS
P2.1 Use compelling and supporting questions to investigate social studies problems.
P2.2 Differentiate between compelling questions and supporting questions.
P2.3 Use supporting questions to help answer compelling social studies questions.
P2.4 Know how to find relevant evidence from a variety of sources.
P2.5 Use data presented in social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and texts to answer
compelling and supporting questions.

P3 PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND DECISION MAKING
P3.1 State an issue as a question of public policy and discuss possible solutions from different
perspectives.
P3.2 Apply Democratic Values or Constitutional Principles to support a position on an issue.
P3.3 Construct an argument and justify a decision supported with evidence.
P3.4 Explain the challenges people have faced and actions they have taken to address issues at
different times and places.

P4 CIVIC PARTICIPATION
P4.1 Act out of the rule of law and hold others to the same standard.
P4.2 Assess options for individuals and groups to plan and conduct activities intended to advance views
on matters of public policy.
P4.3 Explain different strategies students and others could take to address problems and predict
possible results.
P4.4 Use democratic procedures to make decisions on civic issues in the school or classroom.
14

                  SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS: KINDERGARTEN

     HISTORY
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to
     investigate ways people learn about the past.
      H2 Living and Working Together
         Use historical thinking to understand the past.
         K – H2.0.1      Distinguish among the past, present, and future.
         K – H2.0.2      Create a timeline using events from their own lives.
         K – H2.0.3      Describe ways people learn about the past.
     GEOGRAPHY
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to
     investigate how the environment provides for people’s needs and wants.
      G1 The World in Spatial Terms
         Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from
         a spatial perspective.
         K – G1.0.1      Recognize that maps and globes represent places.
         K – G1.0.2   Use directions or positional words to identify significant locations in
         the classroom.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: up/down, in/out, above/below,
         left/right.
      G2 Places and Regions
         Understand how regions are created from common physical and human
         characteristics.
         K – G2.0.1      Identify and describe places in the immediate environment.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: classroom, home, playground.
      G5 Environment and Society
         Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
         K – G5.0.1  Describe ways in which the environment provides for basic human
         needs and wants.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: food, shelter, clothing.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		    		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             15
CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
ways in which people can get along with each other.
 C1 Purposes of Government
   Explain why people create governments.
   K – C1.0.1      Identify and explain reasons for rules at home and in school.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: safety, fairness, organization.
 C2 Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles of American Government
   K – C2.0.1     Identify the American flag as an important symbol of the United
   States.
   K – C2.0.2     Explain why people do not have the right to do whatever they want.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: promote fairness, ensure the
   common good, maintain safety.
   K – C2.0.3     Describe fair ways for groups to make decisions.
 C5 Civic Participation
   Explain important rights and how, when, and where members of American society
   demonstrate their responsibilities by actively participating in civic life.
   K – C5.0.1     Describe situations in which they demonstrated self-discipline and
   individual responsibility.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: caring for a pet, completing
   chores, following school rules, working in a group, taking turns.
ECONOMICS
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
how people meet their economic wants.
 E1 Market Economy
   Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic
   activity in a market economy.
   K – E1.0.1     Describe economic wants they have experienced.
   K – E1.0.2     Distinguish between goods and services.
   K – E1.0.3     Recognize situations in which people trade.
16
     PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION (P3, P4)
      P3.1        Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
       Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and
       generate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
       K – P3.1.1      Identify classroom issues.
       K – P3.1.2      Use simple graphs to explain information about a classroom issue.
       K – P3.1.3   Compare their viewpoint about a classroom issue with the viewpoint of
       another person.
      P3.3        Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
       Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
       K – P3.3.1      Express a position on a classroom issue.
      P4.2        Civic Participation
       Act constructively to further the public good.
       K – P4.2.1    Develop and implement an action plan to address or inform others
       about a classroom issue.
       K – P4.2.2      Participate in projects to help or inform others.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             17

                  SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS: GRADE ONE


HISTORY
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
family life in the past.
H2     Living and Working Together in Families and Schools
 Use historical thinking to understand the past.
     1 – H2.0.1    Demonstrate chronological thinking by distinguishing among past,
     present, and future using family or school events.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: using a calendar to distinguish
     among days, weeks, and months.
     1 – H2.0.2  Investigate a family history for at least two generations, identifying
     various members and their connections in order to tell a narrative about family life.
     1 – H2.0.3      Use historical sources to draw possible conclusions about family or
     school life in the past.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: photos, diaries, oral histories,
     videos, artifacts.
     1 – H2.0.4     Compare life today with life in the past using the criteria of family,
     school, jobs, or communication.
     1 – H2.0.5  Identify the events or people celebrated during U.S. national holidays
     and why we celebrate them.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: Independence Day, Constitution
     Day, Martin Luther King Jr. Day, Presidents Day, Veterans Day.
GEOGRAPHY
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
ways in which people interact with their environments.
G1     The World in Spatial Terms
  Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from a spa-
tial perspective.
     1 – G1.0.1    Construct simple maps of the classroom to demonstrate aerial per-
     spective.
     1 – G1.0.2    Describe places using absolute location or relative location.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: home address (absolute location),
     positional words such as in front of, behind, between (relative location).
18
          1 – G1.0.3    Distinguish between landmasses and bodies of water using maps and
          globes.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: islands and continents (landmass-
          es), rivers, lakes, oceans (bodies of water).
     G2     Places and Regions
      Understand how regions are created from common physical and human characteristics.
          1 – G2.0.1    Distinguish between physical and human characteristics of places.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: trees, landmasses, bodies of wa-
          ter (physical/natural), buildings, playgrounds, sidewalks, roads (human).
          1 – G2.0.2    Describe the unifying characteristics and boundaries of different school
          regions.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: playground, reading corner, li-
          brary, restroom.
     G4     Human Systems
     Understand how human activities help shape the Earth’s surface.
          1 – G4.0.1    Use components of culture to describe diversity in family life.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: foods, language, religion, tradi-
          tions.
     G5     Environment and Society
     Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
          1 – G5.0.1    Describe ways in which people are part of, modify, and adapt to their
          physical environments.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: being part of the environment
          (interacting with the environment by taking a walk, swimming in a lake, or fishing),
          modifying the environment (building homes, planting gardens, mowing lawns), and
          adapting to the environment (wearing different clothes in different seasons).
          1 – G5.0.2     Describe ways in which the physical environment in a place or region
          affects people’s lives.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: warm clothes in winter, light jack-
          ets in summer, swimming in summer, sledding in winter, the water around us allow-
          ing us to move goods and people.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                19
CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
ways in which people can get along, including finding fair ways to make decisions and
resolve conflicts.
C1     Purposes of Government
 Explain why people create governments.
     1 – C1.0.1    Explain the need for rules and purposes of rules.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: safety, organization, fairness.
     1 – C1.0.2     Give examples of the use of power with authority and power without
     authority in school.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: principal, teacher, bus driver, line
     leader of safety patrol (power with authority), types of bullying, taking cuts in line
     (power without authority).
C2     Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles of American Government
     1 – C2.0.1    Explain fair ways to make decisions and resolve conflicts in the school
     community.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: majority rules, taking turns, vot-
     ing, talking it out, referring to an authority.
     1 – C2.0.2   Identify important symbols of the United States of America and what
     they represent.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: the U.S. flag, Statue of Liberty,
     White House, Bald Eagle.
C5     Civic Participation
 Explain important rights and how, when, and where members of American society
demonstrate their responsibilities by actively participating in civic life.
     1 – C5.0.1    Describe some responsibilities people have at home and at school.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: taking care of oneself, respect for
     the rights of others, following rules, getting along with others.
     1 – C5.0.2    Explain important rights and how, when, and where members of Amer-
     ican society demonstrate their responsibilities by actively participating in civic life.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: cleaning the playground, helping
     others, helping solve a problem, respecting the rights of others.
20
     ECONOMICS
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
     how scarcity and choice impact decision making.
     E1     Market Economy
      Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity
     in a market economy.
          1 – E1.0.1    Distinguish between producers and consumers of goods and services.
          1 – E1.0.2    Describe ways in which families consume goods and services.
          1 – E1.0.3    Using examples, explain why people cannot have everything they want
          (scarcity) and describe how people respond (choice).
          1 – E1.0.4    Describe reasons why people voluntarily trade.
          1 – E1.0.5    Describe ways in which people earn money.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: providing goods and services to
          others, jobs.
          1 – E1.0.6    Describe how money simplifies trade.
     PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION (P3, P4)
     P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
      Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and gen-
     erate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
          1 – P3.1.1    Identify public issues in the school community.
          1 – P3.1.2  Use graphic data to analyze information about a public issue in the
          school community.
          1 – P3.1.3    Identify alternative resolutions to a public issue in the school
          community.
     P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
      Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
          1 – P3.3.1     Express a position on a public policy issue in the school community
          and justify the position with a reasoned argument.
     P4.2 Civic Participation
      Act constructively to further the public good.
          1 – P4.2.1   Develop and implement an action plan to address or inform others
          about a school issue.
          1 – P4.2.2    Participate in projects to help or inform others.



 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             21

                SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS: GRADE TWO


HISTORY
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
the past in their own and other communities.
H2    Living and Working Together in Communities
Use historical thinking to understand the past.
  2 – H2.0.1    Demonstrate chronological thinking by distinguishing among years and
  decades using a timeline of local community events.
  2 – H2.0.2    Examine different perspectives of the same event in a community and
  explain how and why they are different.
  2 – H2.0.3      Explain how individuals and groups have made significant historical
  changes.
  2 – H2.0.4      Describe changes in the local community over time.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: types of businesses, architecture
  and landscape, jobs, transportation, population.
  2 – H2.0.5      Describe how community members responded to a problem in the
  past.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: natural disasters, factories closing,
  poverty, homelessness, closing of military bases, environmental issues.
  2 – H2.0.6     Construct a historical narrative about the history of the local communi-
  ty from a variety of sources.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: data gathered from local residents,
  artifacts, photographs.
GEOGRAPHY
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
ways in which people interact with their community’s environment and consequences of
those interactions.
G1    The World in Spatial Terms
 Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from a spa-
tial perspective.
  2 – G1.0.1    Construct maps of the local community that contain symbols, labels,
  and legends denoting human and physical characteristics of place.
  2 – G1.0.2    Use maps to describe the spatial organization of the local community by
  applying concepts including relative location, and using distance, direction, and scale.
22


       2 – G1.0.3     Use maps to describe the location of the local community within the
       state of Michigan in relation to other significant places in the state.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: next to, near, between, cardinal
       directions, comparison.
     G2    Places and Regions
      Understand how regions are created from common physical and human characteristics.
       2 – G2.0.1     Compare the physical and human characteristics of the local communi-
       ty with those of another community.
       2 – G2.0.2      Describe how the local community is part of a larger region.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: county, metropolitan area, tribal
       reservation, state.
     G4    Human Systems
      Understand how human activities help shape the earth’s surface.
       2 – G4.0.1      Describe land use in the community.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: where people live, where services
       are provided, where products are made, where people play, where people interact
       with the land.
       2 – G4.0.2      Describe the means people create for moving people, goods, and ideas
       within the local community.
       2 – G4.0.3      Use components of culture to describe diversity in the local community.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: foods, language, religion, tradi-
       tions.
     G5    Environment and Society
      Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
       2 – G5.0.1    Suggest ways in which people can responsibly interact with the envi-
       ronment in the local community.
       2 – G5.0.2    Describe positive and negative consequences of changing the physical
       environment of the local community.
     CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
     how local government affects people living in a community.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                            23
C1   Purposes of Government
Explain why people create governments.
  2 – C1.0.1     Explain why people form governments.
  2 – C1.0.2     Distinguish between government action and private action.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: city snowplows clearing roads
  (government action), clearing the snow on your sidewalk or driveway (private action).
C2   Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles of American Government
  2 – C2.0.1    Explain how local governments balance individual rights with the com-
  mon good to solve local community problems.
  2 – C2.0.2     Describe how the Pledge of Allegiance reflects the Democratic Value of
  patriotism.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: promoting unity and patriotism.
C3   Structure and Functions of Government
Describe the structure of government in the United States and how it functions.
  2 – C3.0.1    Give examples of how local governments make, enforce, and interpret
  laws (ordinances) in the local community.
  2 – C3.0.2     Use examples to describe how local government affects the lives of
  people in a community.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: setting speed limits to promote
  safety, putting up traffic lights, clearing roads, monitoring water quality, removing
  unsafe buildings.
  2 – C3.0.3     Identify services commonly provided by local governments.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: police, fire departments, schools,
  libraries, parks.
C5   Civic Participation
 Explain important rights and how, when, and where members of American society
demonstrate their responsibilities by actively participating in civic life.
  2 – C5.0.1     Identify ways in which people participate in community decisions.
  2 – C5.0.2    Distinguish between personal and civic responsibilities and explain why
  they are important in community life.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: taking care of your dog, recycling,
  caring for family members (personal responsibility), getting a dog license, putting re-
  cycling in the appropriate place, serving on a jury (civic responsibility).
  2 – C5.0.3     Design and participate in community improvement projects that help
  or inform others.
24
     ECONOMICS
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
     economic activity in their own and other communities.
     E1      Market Economy
      Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity
     in a market economy.
          2 – E1.0.1     Identify the opportunity cost involved in a consumer decision.
          2 – E1.0.2    Describe how businesses in the local community meet economic wants
          of consumers.
          2 – E1.0.3     Describe the natural, human, and capital resources needed for produc-
          tion of a good or service in a community.
          2 – E1.0.4     Use examples to show that people cannot produce everything they
          want (specialization) and depend on trade with others to meet their wants (interde-
          pendence).
          2 – E1.0.5     Utilize a decision-making process to analyze the benefits and costs of a
          personal decision.
     PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION (P3, P4)
     P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
      Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and gen-
     erate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
          2 – P3.1.1     Identify public issues in the local community that influence people’s
          daily lives.
          2 – P3.1.2      Use graphic data and other sources to analyze information about a
          public issue in the local community and evaluate alternative resolutions.
          2 – P3.1.3      Give examples of how conflicts over Democratic Values lead people to
          differ on resolutions to a public policy issue in the local community.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: common good, equality, individual
          rights, justice (fairness).
     P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
      Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
          2 – P3.3.1    Compose a statement expressing a position on a public policy issue in
          the local community and justify the position with a reasoned argument.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                  25
P4.2 Civic Participation
 Act constructively to further the public good.
  2 – P4.2.1   Develop and implement an action plan to address or inform others
  about a community issue.
  2 – P4.2.2      Participate in projects to help or inform others.
26

                                                 3RD-5TH GRADE OVERVIEW

                                                       3rd-5th Grade-Specific Contexts
           3rd             Michigan       Students explore the social studies disciplines of history, geography, civics and government,
                           Studies        and economics through the context of Michigan studies.
           4th            U.S. Studies    Using the context of the state of Michigan post statehood and the United States, 4th grade
                                          students learn significant social studies concepts within an increasingly complex social
                                          environment. They examine fundamental concepts in geography, civics and government, and
                                          economics organized by topic, region, or issue.
           5th          Integrated U.S.   Building upon the geography, civics and government, and economics concepts of the United
                            History       States mastered in 4th grade and historical inquiry from earlier grades, the 5th grade
                                          expectations begin a more discipline-centered approach concentrating on the early history of
                                          the United States. Students begin their study of American history with Indigenous Peoples
                                          before the arrival of European explorers and conclude with the adoption of the Bill of Rights
                                          in 1791. Although the content expectations are organized by historical era, they build upon
                                          students’ understanding of the other social studies disciplines from earlier grades and require
                                          students to apply these concepts within the context of American history.
                                              3rd-4th Grade Social Studies Overview Chart
        History              Geography                       Civics and                     Economics                  Public Discourse,
                                                            Government                                                 Decision Making,
                                                                                                                          and Citizen
                                                                                                                         Involvement
     Living and         The World in Spatial      Purposes of Government              Market Economy              Identifying and Analyzing
     Working            Terms                                                                                     Public Issues
                                                  Explain why people create           Use fundamental
     Together
                        Use geographic            governments.                        principles and concepts     Clearly state a problem as a
     Use historical     representations to                                            of economics to             public policy issue, analyze
                                                  Democratic Values and
     thinking to        acquire, process, and                                         understand economic         various perspectives, and
                                                  Constitutional Principles
     understand         report information from                                       activity in a market        generate and evaluate
                                                  of American Government
     the past in        a spatial perspective.                                        economy.                    possible alternative
     the local                                    Understand Democratic                                           resolutions.
                        Places and Regions                                            National Economy
     community.                                   Values and Constitutional
                                                                                                                  Persuasive Communication
                        Understand how            Principles of American              Use fundamental
     Michigan
                        regions are created       government.                         principles and concepts     Communicate a reasoned
     History
                        from common                                                   of economics to             position on a public issue.
                                                  Structure and Function of
     Use historical     physical and human                                            understand economic
                                                  Government
     thinking to        characteristics.                                              activity in the United      Civic Participation
     understand                                   Describe the structure of           States.
                        Human Systems                                                                             Act constructively to further
     the past in                                  government in the United
                                                                                      International               the public good.
     Michigan.          Understand how human      States and how it functions.
                                                                                      Economy
                        activities help shape
                                                  Civic Participation
                        the Earth’s surface.                                          Use fundamental
                                                  Explain important rights            principles and concepts
                        Environment and
                                                  and how, when, and where            of economics to
                        Society
                                                  people can demonstrate              understand economic
                        Understand the effects    their responsibilities by           activity in the global
                        of human-environment      participating in government.        economy.
                        interactions.



                                          5th Grade Integrated U.S. History Overview Chart
           History                 Geography             Civics and Government               Economics                  Public Discourse,
                                                                                                                      Decision Making, and
                                                                                                                       Civic Participation
     U1 USHG Era 1            G Geographic              C Civic Perspective             E Economic                 P Public Discourse,
     Beginnings to 1620       Perspective                                               Perspective                Decision Making, and
                                                        • Purposes of Government
                                                                                                                   Civic Participation
                              • The World in Spatial    • Roles and Functions of        • Individual, Business,
     U2 USHG Era 2
                                Terms                     Government                      and Government           • Identifying and Analyzing
     Colonization and
                              • Places and Regions      • Democratic Values and           Choices                    Public Issues
     Settlement
                              • Physical Systems          Constitutional Principles     • Economic Systems         • Persuasive Communication
                              • Human Systems             in American Democracy                                    • Civic Participation
     U3 USHG Era 3
                              • Environment and         • Civic Participation
     Revolution and the
                                Society
     New Nation




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                           		                        MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                                        27

                                 THE ARC OF INQUIRY: GRADES 3-5

Dimension 1: Developing Questions and Planning Inquiries Central to a rich social studies experience is the capability
for developing questions that can frame and advance an inquiry. Those questions come in two forms: compelling and supporting
questions.
Individually and collaboratively, students construct compelling questions and:
      • explain why compelling questions are important to others (e.g., peers, adults).
      • identify disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question that are open to different interpretations.
      • identify the disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a supporting question that are open to interpretation.
      • explain how supporting questions help answer compelling questions in an inquiry.
      • determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions, taking into
          consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions.
Dimension 2: Applying Disciplinary Concepts and Tools The four disciplines within social studies provide the intellectual
context for studying how humans have interacted with each other and with the environment over time. Each of these disciplines
— civics, economics, geography, and history — offers a unique way of thinking and organizing knowledge as well as systems for
verifying knowledge. Dimension 2 focuses on the disciplinary concepts and tools students need to understand and apply as they
study the specific content described in Michigan’s state standards.
Dimension 3: Evaluating Sources and Using Evidence Dimension 3 includes the skills students need to analyze information
and come to conclusions in an inquiry. These skills focus on gathering and evaluating sources, and then developing claims and using
evidence to support these claims.
Individually and collaboratively, students:
      • gather relevant information from multiple sources while using the origin, structure, and context to guide the selection.
      • use distinctions among fact and opinion to determine the credibility of multiple sources.
      • identify evidence that draws information from multiple sources in response to compelling questions.
      • use evidence to develop claims in response to compelling questions.
Dimension 4: Communicating Conclusions and Taking Informed Action Students should construct and communicate claims
for a variety of purposes and audiences. These audiences may range from the school classroom to the larger public community.
Individually and collaboratively, students:
      • construct arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources.
      • construct explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples, and details with relevant information and data.
      • present a summary of arguments and explanations to others outside the classroom using print and oral technologies (e.g.,
          posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, and reports) and digital technologies (e.g., Internet, social media, and
          digital documentary).
      • critique arguments.
      • critique explanations.
      • draw on disciplinary concepts to explain the challenges people have faced and opportunities they have created, in
          addressing local, regional, and global problems at various times and places.
      • explain different strategies and approaches students and others could take in working alone and together to address local,
          regional, and global problems, and predict possible results of their actions; use listening, consensus-building, and voting
          procedures to decide on and take action in their classrooms.
      • use a range of deliberative and democratic procedures to make decisions about and act on civic problems in their
          classrooms and schools.
28
                              Sample 3rd-5th Grade Compelling and Supporting Questions
         3rd        What makes     1) How is the geography of Michigan similar to or different from the geography of other
                     Michigan      states?
                     special?
                                   2) How is the geography different in different places in Michigan?
                                   3) How does Michigan’s location in North America influence its resources?


                                   Standards Connection: 3 – G2.0.1, 3 – G2.0.2, 3 – G4.0.1, 3 – G4.0.2, 3 – G4.0.3,
                                   3 – G4.0.4
         4th       How does the    1) What are the characteristics of a market economy?
                   U.S. economy
                                   2) How does a market economy work?
                       work?
                                   3) How does specialization and division of labor increase productivity?
                                   4) How is the U.S. economy impacted by global competition?


                                   Standards Connection: 3 – E1.0.1, 3 – E1.0.2, 3 – E1.0.3, 3 – E1.0.4, 3 – E1.0.5,
                                   3 – E1.0.6, 3 – E1.0.7, 3 – E1.0.8, 3 – E2.0.1
         5th      Does geography   1) What conditions and connections determine the fate of a settlement?
                    determine
                                   2) How did Europeans benefit from the Triangular Trade and what impact did it have on the
                     destiny?
                                   lives of West Africans?
                                   3) How and why did different colonial regions develop differently?


                                   Standards Connection: 5 – U2.1.1, 5 – U2.1.2, 5 – U2.1.3, 5 – U2.1.4




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                		                      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                           29

          SOCIAL STUDIES PROCESS AND SKILLS STANDARDS 3-5


P1 READING AND COMMUNICATION – READ AND COMMUNICATE EFFECTIVELY
P1.1 Use appropriate strategies to read and interpret basic social science tables, graphs, graphics,
maps, and texts.
P1.2 Differentiate between primary and secondary source documents.
P1.3 Express social science ideas or information in written, spoken, and graphic forms including tables,
line graphs, bar graphs, and maps.
P1.4 Identify point of view and bias.

P2 INQUIRY, RESEARCH, AND ANALYSIS
P2.1 Use compelling and supporting questions to investigate social studies problems.
P2.2 Differentiate between compelling questions and supporting questions.
P2.3 Use supporting questions to help answer compelling social studies questions.
P2.4 Know how to find relevant evidence from a variety of sources.
P2.5 Use data presented in social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and texts to answer
compelling and supporting questions.

P3 PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND DECISION MAKING
P3.1 State an issue as a question of public policy and discuss possible solutions from different
perspectives.
P3.2 Apply Democratic Values or Constitutional Principles to support a position on an issue.
P3.3 Construct an argument and justify a decision supported with evidence.
P3.4 Explain the challenges people have faced and actions they have taken to address issues at
different times and places.

P4 CIVIC PARTICIPATION
P4.1 Act out of the rule of law and hold others to the same standard.
P4.2 Assess options for individuals and groups to plan and conduct activities intended to advance views
on matters of public policy.
P4.3 Explain different strategies students and others could take to address problems and predict
possible results.
P4.4 Use democratic procedures to make decisions on civic issues in the school or classroom.
30

                    SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS: GRADE THREE


     HISTORY
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
     early Michigan history.
     H3    The History of Michigan (Through Statehood)
      Use historical thinking to understand the past.
       3 – H3.0.1      Identify questions historians ask in examining the past in Michigan.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: What happened? When did it hap-
       pen? Who was involved? How and why did it happen?
       3 – H3.0.2    Explain how historians use primary and secondary sources to answer
       questions about the past.
       3 – H3.0.3      Describe the causal relationships between three events in Michigan’s
       past.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: the Erie canal, more people came,
       statehood.
       3 – H3.0.4     Draw upon traditional stories and/or teachings of Indigenous Peoples
       who lived and continue to live in Michigan in order to better understand their beliefs
       and histories.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers.
       3 – H3.0.5     Use informational text and visual data to compare how Indigenous
       Peoples and non-Indigenous Peoples in the early history of Michigan interacted with,
       adapted to, used, and/or modified their environments.
       3 – H3.0.6    Use a variety of sources to describe interactions that occurred between
       Indigenous Peoples and the first European explorers and settlers in Michigan.
       3 – H3.0.7      Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to construct a histori-
       cal narrative about daily life in the early settlements of Michigan (pre-statehood).
       3 – H3.0.8     Use case studies or stories to describe how the ideas or actions of indi-
       viduals affected the history of Michigan (pre-statehood).
       3 – H3.0.9      Describe how Michigan attained statehood.
       3 – H3.0.10    Create a timeline to sequence and describe major eras and events in
       early Michigan history.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                              31
GEOGRAPHY
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
ways people have interacted with the environment of Michigan now and in the past, and
consequences of those interactions.
G1    The World in Spatial Terms
 Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from a spa-
tial perspective.
  3 – G1.0.1      Use cardinal directions (north, south, east, west) to describe the rela-
  tive locations of significant places in the immediate environment.
  3 – G1.0.2      Use thematic maps to identify and describe the physical and human
  characteristics of Michigan.
  3 – G1.0.3     Use a world map to describe North America in relation to the equator
  and other continents and oceans, and Michigan within North America.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: locate Michigan in relation to the
  United States, the North Pole, and the equator.
G2    Places and Regions
 Understand how regions are created from common physical and human characteristics.
  3 – G2.0.1    Use a variety of visual materials and data sources to describe ways in
  which Michigan can be divided into regions.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: physical features (lakes versus
  land), land use (forest, agriculture, urban), and political (state, county, and tribal
  boundaries).
  3 – G2.0.2      Describe different regions to which Michigan belongs.
  Examples may include but are not limited to: Great Lakes region, Midwest, Unit-
  ed States, North America.
G4    Human Systems
 Understand how human activities help shape the Earth’s surface.
  3 – G4.0.1      Describe major kinds of economic activity in Michigan today, such as
  agriculture, forestry, manufacturing, services and tourism, and research and develop-
  ment, and explain the factors influencing the location of these economic activities.
  Examples of economic activities may include but are not limited to: agricul-
  ture (e.g., corn, cherries, dairy, Christmas trees); manufacturing (e.g., automobiles,
  wood products); and research and development (e.g., Automation Alley, life sciences
  corridor, university communities).
  Examples of factors influencing location may include but are not limited to:
  primary industries located near natural resources; manufacturing influenced by acces-
  sibility to resources, labor, markets, and capital; and services, which are often located
  close to markets.
32
       3 – G4.0.2   Describe diverse groups that have migrated into a region of Michigan
       and reasons why they came (push/pull factors).
       Examples may include but are not limited to: Finnish migrating to the upper
       peninsula, Chaldeans migrating into southeastern Michigan, Dutch migrating to west-
       ern Michigan.
       3 – G4.0.3     Describe some of the current movements of goods, people, jobs, or
       information to, from, or within Michigan and explain reasons for the movements.
       3 – G4.0.4    Use data and current information about the Anishinaabek and other
       Indigenous Peoples living in Michigan today to describe the cultural aspects of modern
       life.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: tribal citizenship, tribal govern-
       ments, treaty rights, reservation boundaries, cultural events.
     G5    Environment and Society
      Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
       3 – G5.0.1    Describe how people are a part of, adapt to, use, and modify the phys-
       ical environment of Michigan.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: interdependence of people and the
       environment, interaction of people with the environment, appreciation for the envi-
       ronment, e.g., taking a walk, watching birds, swimming in a lake, fishing, hunting,
       photography, harvesting maple syrup.
       3 – G5.0.2      Locate natural resources in Michigan and explain the consequences of
       their use.
     CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
     the structure and functions of Michigan’s government and rights and responsibilities of
     citizenship.
     C1    Purposes of Government
      Explain why people create governments.
       3 – C1.0.1    Give an example of how Michigan state government fulfills one of the
       purposes of government.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: protecting individual rights, pro-
       moting the common good, ensuring equal treatment under the law.
     C2    Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles of American Government
       3 – C2.0.1     Describe how the Michigan state government reflects the principle of
       representative government.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                              33
C3      Structure and Functions of Government
 Describe the structure of government in the United States and how it functions.
     3 – C3.0.1    Distinguish between the roles of tribal, state, and local governments.
     3 – C3.0.2    Identify goods and services provided by the state government and de-
     scribe how they are funded.
     Examples of services may include but are not limited to: maintaining highways,
     state parks, state forests.
     Examples of how things are funded may include but are not limited to: taxes,
     fees, fines.
     3 – C3.0.3    Identify the three branches of state government in Michigan and the
     powers of each.
     3 – C3.0.4    Explain how state courts function to resolve conflict.
     3 – C3.0.5    Describe the purpose of the Michigan Constitution.
C5      Civic Participation
 Explain important rights and how, when, and where members of American society
demonstrate their responsibilities by actively participating in civic life.
     3 – C5.0.1    Identify and explain rights and responsibilities of citizenship.
     Examples of rights may include but are not limited to: freedom of speech, free-
     dom of religion, right to own property.
     Examples of responsibilities may include but are not limited to: respecting the
     rights of others, voting, obeying laws.
ECONOMICS
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
the economy of Michigan.
E1      Market Economy
 Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity
in a market economy.
     3 – E1.0.1      Using a Michigan example, explain how scarcity, choice, and opportuni-
     ty cost affect what is produced and consumed.
     3 – E1.0.2    Identify incentives that influence economic decisions people make in
     Michigan.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: sales, coupons, tax incentives,
     recycling.
34
          3 – E1.0.3   Analyze how Michigan’s location and natural resources influenced its
          economic development.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: how waterways and other natural
          resources have influenced economic activities such as farming, mining, lumbering,
          automobile manufacturing, and furniture making.
          3 – E1.0.4     Describe how entrepreneurs combine natural, human, and capital re-
          sources to produce goods and services in Michigan.
          3 – E1.0.5     Explain the role of entrepreneurship and business development in
          Michigan’s economic future.
     E2      National Economy
       Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity
     in the United States.
          3 – E2.0.1     Using a Michigan example, explain how specialization leads to in-
          creased interdependence.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: cherries grown in Michigan are
          sold in Florida; oranges grown in Florida are sold in Michigan.
     E3      International Economy
       Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity
     in the global economy.
          3 – E3.0.1     Identify products produced in other countries and consumed by people
          in Michigan.
     PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION (P3, P4)
     P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
      Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and gen-
     erate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
          3 – P3.1.1     Identify public issues in Michigan that influence the daily lives of its
          citizens.
          3 – P3.1.2      Use graphic data and other sources to analyze information about a
          public issue in Michigan and evaluate alternative resolutions.
          3 – P3.1.3      Give examples of how conflicts over Democratic Values lead people to
          differ on resolutions to a public policy issue in Michigan.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: common good, equality, individual
          rights, justice (fairness).




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		        		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                        35
P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
  3 – P3.3.1    Compose a paragraph expressing a position on a public policy issue in
  Michigan and justify the position with a reasoned argument.
P4.2 Civic Participation
Act constructively to further the public good.
  3 – P4.2.1    Develop and implement an action plan and know how, when, and
  where to address or inform others about a public issue.
  3 – P4.2.2     Participate in projects to help or inform others.
36

                      SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS: GRADE FOUR


     HISTORY
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
     post-statehood Michigan history.
     H3     The History of Michigan (Beyond Statehood)
      Use historical thinking to understand the past.
          4 – H3.0.1   Use historical inquiry questions to investigate the development of
          Michigan’s major economic activities from statehood to present.
          Examples of questions may include but are not limited to: What happened?
          When did it happen? Who was involved? How and why did it happen? How does it
          relate to other events or issues in the past, in the present, or in the future? What is
          its significance?
          Examples of economic activities may include but are not limited to: agricul-
          ture, mining, manufacturing, lumbering, tourism, technology, and research.
          4 – H3.0.2    Use primary and secondary sources to explain how migration and im-
          migration affected and continue to affect the growth of Michigan.
          4 – H3.0.3     Use case studies or stories to describe the ideas and actions of individ-
          uals involved in the Underground Railroad in Michigan and in the Great Lakes region.
          4 – H3.0.4    Describe how the relationship between the location of natural resourc-
          es and the location of industries (after 1837) affected and continue to affect the
          location and growth of Michigan cities.
          4 – H3.0.5    Use visual data and informational text or primary accounts to compare
          a major Michigan economic activity today with that same activity or a related activity
          in the past.
          4 – H3.0.6     Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to construct a histor-
          ical narrative about the beginnings of the automobile industry and the labor move-
          ment in Michigan.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: stories, photos, artifacts, oral his-
          tory, letters.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		       		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             37
     4 – H3.0.7    Describe past and current threats to Michigan’s natural resources and
     describe how state government, tribal and local governments, schools, organizations,
     and individuals worked in the past and continue to work today to protect its natural
     resources.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: the Flint water crisis, invasive
     species, loss of sturgeon and wild rice.
GEOGRAPHY
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
ways in which people have interacted with the environment of Michigan now and in the
past, and consequences of those interactions.
G1     The World in Spatial Terms
 Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from a spa-
tial perspective.
     4 – G1.0.1    Identify questions geographers ask in examining the United States.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: Where is it? What is it like there?
     How is it connected to other places?
     4 – G1.0.2    Identify and describe the characteristics and purposes of a variety of
     technological geographic tools.
     Examples of purposes may include but are not limited to: measure distance,
     determine relative or absolute location, classify a region.
     Examples of tools and technologies may include but are not limited to:
     globe, map, Geographic Information Systems (GIS), satellite image.
     4 – G1.0.3   Use geographic tools and technologies, stories, songs, and pictures to
     answer geographic questions about the United States.
     4 – G1.0.4     Use maps to describe elevation, climate, and patterns of population
     density in the United States.
     4 – G1.0.5    Use hemispheres, continents, oceans, and major lines of latitude to
     describe the relative location of the United States on a world map.
G2     Places and Regions
 Understand how regions are created from common physical and human characteristics.
     4 – G2.0.1    Describe ways in which the United States can be divided into different
     regions.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: political regions, land-use re-
     gions, land-form regions, vegetation regions.
     4 – G2.0.2    Locate and describe human and physical characteristics of major U.S.
     regions and compare them to the Great Lakes region.
38
     G4     Human Systems
      Understand how human activities help shape the Earth’s surface.
          4 – G4.0.1    Use a case study or story about migration within or to the United
          States to identify push and pull factors (why they left, why they came) that influ-
          enced the migration.
          4 – G4.0.2  Describe the impact of immigration to the United States on the cultural
          development of different places or regions of the United States.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: forms of shelter, language, food.
          4 – G4.0.3    Describe some of the movements of resources, goods, people, and
          information to, from, or within the United States, and explain the reasons for the
          movements.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: movement of fossil fuels, cloth-
          ing, retirees, refugees, migrant farm workers, and manufacturing jobs into and with-
          in the United States.
     G5     Environment and Society
      Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
          4 – G5.0.1   Assess the positive and negative consequences of human activities
          on the physical environment of the United States and identify the causes of those
          activities.
     CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
     the structure and functions of Michigan’s government, and rights and responsibilities of
     citizenship.
     C1     Purposes of Government
      Explain why people create governments.
          4 – C1.0.1    Identify questions political scientists ask in examining the United
          States.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: What does government do? What
          are the basic values and principles of American democracy? What are the roles of the
          citizen in American democracy?
          4 – C1.0.2     Describe the purposes of government as identified in the Preamble of
          the Constitution.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                              39
C2     Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles of American Government
     4 – C2.0.1    Explain how the principles of popular sovereignty, rule of law, checks
     and balances, separation of powers, and individual rights serve to limit the powers of
     the federal government as reflected in the Constitution and Bill of Rights.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: individual rights (e.g., freedom of
     religion, freedom of expression, and freedom of press).
     4 – C2.0.2    Describe how rights guaranteed by the Constitution, including the Bill
     of Rights, and Democratic Values are involved in everyday situations.
     Examples of rights may include but are not limited to: voting, freedom of reli-
     gion, freedom of expression, and freedom of press.
     Examples of values may include but are not limited to: common good, equali-
     ty, individual rights, justice (fairness), right to alter laws.
C3     Structure and Functions of Government
 Describe the structure of government in the United States and how it functions.
     4 – C3.0.1  Give examples of ways the Constitution limits the powers of the federal
     government.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: election of public officers, separa-
     tion of powers, checks and balances, Bill of Rights.
     4 – C3.0.2  Give examples of powers exercised by the federal government, tribal
     governments and state governments.
     Examples for federal government may include but are not limited to: coining
     of money, declaring war.
     Examples for tribal governments may include but are not limited to: issuing
     hunting, gathering, and fishing licenses, issuing tribal identification cards.
     Examples for state governments may include but are not limited to: issuing
     driver’s licenses, issuing marriage licenses.
     4 – C3.0.3    Describe the organizational structure of the federal government in the
     United States (legislative, executive, and judicial branches).
     4 – C3.0.4   Describe how the powers of the federal government are separated
     among the branches.
     4 – C3.0.5    Give examples of how the system of checks and balances limits the
     power of the federal government.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: presidential veto of legislation,
     courts declaring a law unconstitutional, congressional approval of judicial appoint-
     ments.
40
          4 – C3.0.6     Describe how the President, members of the Congress, Supreme Court
          Justices are elected or appointed.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: elections versus appointments.
          4 – C3.0.7   Explain how the federal government uses taxes and spending to serve
          the purposes of government.
     C5     Civic Participation
      Explain important rights and how, when, and where members of American society
     demonstrate their responsibilities by actively participating in civic life
          4 – C5.0.1     Explain the responsibilities of members of American society.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: initiating changes in laws or policy,
          holding public office, respecting the law, being informed and attentive to public is-
          sues, paying taxes, registering to vote and voting knowledgeably, serving as a juror.
          4 – C5.0.2   Explain rights of citizenship, why rights have limits, and the relation-
          ships between rights and responsibilities.
          4 – C5.0.3    Describe ways in which people can work together to promote the val-
          ues and principles of American democracy.
     ECONOMICS
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
     the economy of Michigan.
     E1     Market Economy
      Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity
     in a market economy.
          4 – E1.01    Identify a good or service produced in the United States and apply the
          three economic questions all economies must address.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: What goods and services will be
          produced? How will these goods and services be produced? Who will consume the
          goods and services?
          4 – E1.0.2    Describe characteristics of a market economy.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: private property rights, voluntary
          exchange, competition, consumer sovereignty, incentives, specialization.
          4 – E1.0.3  Describe how positive and negative incentives influence behavior in a
          market economy.
          Examples of positive incentives may include but are not limited to: respond-
          ing to a sale, saving money, earning money.
          Examples of negative incentives may include but are not limited to: library
          fines.


 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                   41
     4 – E1.0.4     Explain how price affects decisions about purchasing goods and ser-
     vices.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: substitute goods, complementary
     goods.
     4 – E1.0.5     Explain how specialization and division of labor increase productivity.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: assembly lines.
     4 – E1.0.6   Explain how competition among buyers results in higher prices, and
     competition among sellers results in lower prices.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: supply, demand.
     4 – E1.0.7     Describe the role of money in the exchange of goods and services.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: people earn income and use the
     income to purchase goods and services.
     4 – E1.0.8    List goods and services governments provide in a market economy and
     explain how these goods and services are funded.
     Examples of goods and services may include but are not limited to: libraries,
     roads, parks, the Mackinac Bridge.
     Examples of funding may include but are not limited to: taxes, tolls, fees.
E2     National Economy
  Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity
in the United States.
     4 – E2.0.1  Explain how changes in the United States economy impact levels of
     employment and unemployment.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: changing demand for natural re-
     sources, changes in technology, changes in competition.
E3     International Economy
  Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activi-
ty in the global economy.
     4 – E3.0.1     Identify advantages and disadvantages of global competition.
PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION (P3, P4)
P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
 Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and gen-
erate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
     4 – P3.1.1       Identify public issues in the United States that influence the daily lives
     of its citizens.
42
        4 – P3.1.2     Use graphic data and other sources to analyze information about a
        public issue in the United States and evaluate alternative resolutions.
        4 – P3.1.3     Give examples of how conflicts over Democratic Values lead people to
        differ on resolutions to a public policy issue in the United States.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: common good, equality, individu-
        al rights, justice (fairness).
     P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
     Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
        4 – P3.3.1    Compose a brief essay expressing a position on a public policy issue in
        the United States and justify the position with a reasoned argument.
     P4.2 Civic Participation
     Act constructively to further the public good.
         4 – P4.2.1  Develop and implement an action plan and know how, when, and
         where to address or inform others about a public issue.
         4 – P4.2.2    Participate in projects to help or inform others.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                                  43

                             5TH GRADE INTEGRATED U.S. HISTORY

INTEGRATED* U.S. HISTORY ORGANIZED BY ERA – GRADE 5
USHG ERA 1 – Beginnings to 1620
    1.1           Indigenous Peoples’ Lives in the Americas
    1.2           European Exploration
    1.3           African Life Before the 16th Century
    1.4           Three World Interactions
USHG ERA 2 – Colonization and Settlement (1585-1763)
    2.1           European Struggle for Control of North America
    2.2           European Slave Trade and Slavery in Colonial America
    2.3           Life in Colonial America
USHG ERA 3 – Revolution and the New Nation (1754-1800)
    3.1           Causes of the American Revolution
    3.2           The American Revolution and its Consequences
    3.3           Creating New Governments and a New Constitution (introduced in 5th grade; begins
                  8th grade expectations)
Note: U.S. historians, history books, history standards, and the peoples themselves have used, at one time or another, “Na-
tive American” and “American Indian,” while Canadian history uses “First Peoples” to refer to inhabitants of North America
prior to European exploration, conquest, and settlement. While we are using “Indigenous Peoples” throughout the content
expectations, students should be familiar with the different names and specific tribal identities as they will likely encounter
variations over the course of their studies.


*Geography, Civics and Government, and Economics are integrated into the historical context.
44

                     SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS: GRADE FIVE


     U1 USHG ERA 1 – BEGINNINGS TO 1620
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to understand
     how early European exploration and colonization resulted in cultural and ecological
     interactions among previously unconnected peoples.
     U1.1 Indigenous Peoples’ Lives in the Americas
      Describe the lives of the Indigenous Peoples living in North America prior to European
     contact.
        5 – U1.1.1    Use maps to locate peoples in the Eastern Woodland (the Woodland
        Peoples east of the Mississippi River), desert Southwest, the Pacific Northwest, and
        the nomadic nations of the Great Plains.
        5 – U1.1.2     Compare how Indigenous Peoples in the Eastern Woodland and
        another tribal region adapted to or modified the environment.
        5 – U1.1.3     Describe Eastern Woodland life with respect to governmental and
        family structures, trade, and their relationship to the land.
     U1.2 European Exploration
     Identify the causes and consequences of European exploration and colonization.
        5 – U1.2.1    Explain the technological and political developments that made sea
        exploration possible.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: the invention of the astrolabe,
        improved maps, the rise of nation-states.
        5 – U1.2.2    Use case studies of individual explorers and stories of life in Europe
        to compare the goals, obstacles, motivations, and consequences for European
        exploration and colonization of the Americas.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: the economic, political, cultural,
        and religious consequences of colonization, including who was impacted.
     U1.3 African Life Before the 16th Century
     Describe the lives of peoples living in West Africa prior to the 16th century.
        5 – U1.3.1     Use maps to locate the major regions of Africa (North Africa, West
        Africa, Central Africa, East Africa, Southern Africa).
        5 – U1.3.2     Describe the life and cultural development of people living in West
        Africa before the 16th century with respect to economic (the ways people made a
        living) and family structures, and the growth of states, towns, and trade.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                            45
U1.4 Three World Interactions
 Describe the environmental, political, and cultural consequences of the interactions
among European, African, and Indigenous Peoples in the late 15th century through the
17th century.
     5 – U1.4.1     Describe the convergence of Europeans, Indigenous Peoples, and
     Africans in the Americas after 1492 from the perspective of these three groups.
     5 – U1.4.2    Use primary and secondary sources to compare Europeans, Africans,
     and Indigenous Peoples who converged in the Western Hemisphere after 1492 with
     respect to governmental structure, and views on property ownership and land use.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: letters, diaries, maps, documents,
     narratives, pictures, graphic data.
     5 – U1.4.3   Explain the cultural impact that occurred between the British, French,
     and Spanish on the lives of Indigenous Peoples.
     5 – U1.4.4   Describe the Columbian Exchange and its impact on Europeans,
     Indigenous Peoples, and Africans.
U2     USHG ERA 2 – COLONIZATION AND SETTLEMENT (1585-1763)
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to understand
how European values and institutions transferred to and modified in the colonies, and
how slavery reshaped European and African life in the Americas.
U2.1 European Struggle for Control of North America
 Compare the regional settlement patterns and describe significant developments in
Southern, New England, and the Mid-Atlantic colonies.
     5 – U2.1.1    Describe significant developments in the Southern colonies, including:
      •   patterns of settlement and control, including the impact of geography (land-
          forms and climate) on settlement.
      •   the establishment of Jamestown.
      •   the development of one-crop economies (plantation land use and growing
          season for rice in Carolinas and tobacco in Virginia).
      •   interactions with Indigenous Peoples, including the trading of goods, services,
          and ideas among Europeans and Indigenous Peoples.
      •   the development of colonial representative assemblies (House of Burgesses).
      •   the development of slavery.
     5 – U2.1.2    Describe significant developments in the New England colonies,
     including:
      •   patterns of settlement and control including the impact of geography (land-
          forms and climate) on settlement.
46
         •   interactions with Indigenous Peoples, including the trading of goods, services,
             and ideas among Europeans and Indigenous Peoples, growth of agricultural
             (small farms) and non-agricultural (shipping, manufacturing) economies.
         •   the development of government, including the establishment of town meetings,
             development of colonial legislatures, and growth of royal government.
         •   religious tensions in Massachusetts that led to the establishment of other
             colonies in New England.
        5 – U2.1.3     Describe significant developments in the Middle colonies, including:
         •   patterns of settlement and control, including the impact of geography (land-
             forms and climate) on settlement.
         •   interactions with Indigenous Peoples, including the trading of goods, services,
             and ideas among Europeans and Indigenous Peoples.
         •   the growth of economies in the Middle colonies, the Dutch settlement in New
             Netherlands, Quaker settlement in Pennsylvania, and subsequent English
             takeover of the Middle colonies.
         •   immigration patterns leading to ethnic diversity in the Middle colonies.
        5 – U2.1.4   Compare the regional settlement patterns of the Southern colonies,
        New England, and the Middle colonies.
        5 – U2.1.5    Explain the economic, political, cultural, and religious causes of
        migration to colonial North America.
     U2.2 European Slave Trade and Slavery in Colonial America
      Analyze the development of the slave system in the Americas and its impact.
        5 – U2.2.1     Describe Triangular Trade, including:
         • the trade routes.
         • the people and goods that were traded.
         • the Middle Passage.
         • the impact on life in Africa.
        5 – U2.2.2    Describe the lives of enslaved Africans and free Africans, including
        fugitive and escaped slaves in the American colonies.
        5 – U2.2.3     Describe how enslaved and free Africans struggled to retain elements
        of their diverse African histories and cultures to develop distinct African-American
        identities.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: Gullah Islands, Louisiana, The
        Carolinas.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		    		                MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
U2.3 Life in Colonial America                                                                  47

  Distinguish among and explain the reasons for regional differences in colonial America.
     5 – U2.3.1    Locate the New England, Middle, and Southern colonies on a map.
     5 – U2.3.2   Describe the daily lives of people living in the New England, Middle,
     and Southern colonies.
     5 – U2.3.3    Describe colonial life in America from the perspectives of at least three
     different groups of people.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: perspectives of wealthy
     landowners, farmers, merchants, indentured servants, laborers, the poor, women,
     enslaved people, free Africans, and Indigenous Peoples.
     5 – U2.3.4    Describe the development of the emerging labor force in the colonies.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: cash-crop farming, slavery,
     indentured servants.
     5 – U2.3.5    Make generalizations about the reasons for regional differences in
     colonial America.
U3     USHG ERA 3 REVOLUTION AND THE NEW NATION (1754-1800)
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
the causes of the American Revolution, the ideas and interests involved in forging the
revolutionary movement, and the reasons for the American victory.
U3.1 Causes of the American Revolution
 Identify the major political, economic, and ideological reasons for the American
Revolution.
     5 – U3.1.1    Describe how the French and Indian War affected British policy toward
     the colonies and subsequent colonial dissatisfaction with the new policy.
     5 – U3.1.2  Describe the causes and effects of events such as the Stamp Act, the
     Boston Massacre, the Boston Tea Party, and the Intolerable Acts.
     5 – U3.1.3     Using an event from the Revolutionary era, explain how British and
     colonial views on authority and the use of power without authority differed (views on
     representative government).
     Examples may include but are not limited to: the Boston Tea Party, quartering
     of soldiers, writs of assistance, the closing of colonial legislatures.
     5 – U3.1.4    Describe the role of the First and Second Continental Congresses in
     unifying the colonies.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: addressing the Intolerable Acts,
     declaring independence, drafting the Articles of Confederation.
     5 – U3.1.5   Use the Declaration of Independence to explain why many colonists
     wanted to separate from Great Britain and why they believed they had the right to
     do so.
48
        5 – U3.1.6     Identify the role that key individuals played in leading the colonists
        to revolution, including George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin,
        Patrick Henry, Samuel Adams, John Adams, and Thomas Paine.
        5 – U3.1.7  Describe how colonial experiences with self-government and ideas
        about government influenced the decision to declare independence.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: Mayflower Compact, House of
        Burgesses and town meetings; the Iroquois Confederacy; protecting individual rights
        and promoting the common good; natural rights; limited government; representative
        government.
        5 – U3.1.8    Identify a problem that people in the colonies faced, identify
        alternative choices for addressing the problem with possible consequences, and
        describe the course of action taken.
     U3.2 The American Revolution and its Consequences
     Explain the multi-faceted nature of the American Revolution and its consequences.
        5 – U3.2.1    Describe the advantages and disadvantages each side had during
        the American Revolution with respect to military leadership, geography, types of
        resources, and motivations.
        5 – U3.2.2     Describe the importance of Valley Forge, the Battle of Saratoga, and
        the Battle of Yorktown in the American Revolution.
        5 – U3.2.3   Investigate the role of women, enslaved and freed Africans,
        Indigenous Peoples, and France in helping shape the outcome of the war.
        5 – U3.2.4    Describe the significance of the Treaty of Paris (establishment of the
        United States and its initial boundaries).
     U3.3 Creating New Government(s) and a New Constitution
      Explain some of the challenges faced by the new nation under the Articles of
     Confederation, and analyze the development of the Constitution as a new plan for
     governing.
        5 – U3.3.1  Describe the powers of the national government and state
        governments under the Articles of Confederation.
        5 – U3.3.2   Give examples of problems the country faced under the Articles of
        Confederation.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: lack of national army, competing
        currencies, reliance on state governments for money.
        5 – U3.3.3    Explain why the Constitutional Convention was convened and why the
        Constitution was written.
        5 – U3.3.4    Describe the issues over representation and slavery the Framers faced
        at the Constitutional Convention and how they were addressed in the Constitution.



 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		    		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                              49
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the Great Compromise, the
   Three-Fifths Compromise.
   5 – U3.3.5  Give reasons why the Framers wanted to limit the power of
   government.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: fear of a strong executive,
   representative government, and the importance of individual rights.
   5 – U3.3.6    Describe the principle of federalism and how it is expressed through
   the sharing and distribution of power as stated in the Constitution.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the Tenth Amendment,
   enumerated powers, reserved powers.
   5 – U3.3.7    Describe the concern that some people had about individual rights and
   why the inclusion of a Bill of Rights was needed for ratification.
   5 – U3.3.8    Describe the rights of individuals protected in the Bill of Rights (the
   first 10 amendments) to the U.S. Constitution.
PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION (P3, P4)
P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
 Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and
generate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
   5 – P3.1.1     Identify contemporary public issues related to the U.S. Constitution
   and their related factual, definitional, and ethical questions.
   5 – P3.1.2   Use graphic data and other sources to analyze information about a
   contemporary public issue related to the U.S. Constitution and evaluate alternative
   resolutions.
   5 – P3.1.3     Give examples of how conflicts over Democratic Values lead people to
   differ on contemporary Constitutional issues in the United States.
P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
  Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
   5 – P3.3.1     Compose a short essay expressing a position on a contemporary
   public-policy issue related to the Constitution and justify the position with a reasoned
   argument.
P4.2 Civic Participation
  Act constructively to further the public good.
   5 – P4.2.1   Develop and implement an action plan and know how, when, and
   where to address or inform others about a public issue.
   5 – P4.2.2     Participate in projects to help or inform others.
50

                                               6TH-8TH GRADE OVERVIEW

                                6th-8th Grade Social Studies Overview Chart

               Grade 6                                    Grade 7                                           Grade 8
           World Geography                            World History and                                    Integrated
                                                         Geography                                        U.S. History
           Grade Level Focus                          Grade Level Focus                              Grade Level Focus
     GEOGRAPHY                                 HISTORY                                       THEMATIC ANALYSIS OF
     G1 The World in Spatial Terms                                                           U.S. HISTORY ERAS 1-5
     G2 Places and Regions                     H1 The World in Temporal Terms
     G3 Physical Systems                                                                     U1 USHG Era 1
     G4 Human Systems                          W1 WHG Era 1                                  Beginnings to 1620
     G5 Environment and Society                The Beginnings of Human Society
     G6 Global Issues                                                                        U2 USHG Era 2
                                               W2 WHG Era 2                                  Colonization and Settlement 1585-1763
     CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT                     Early Civilizations and the Emergence of
     C1 Purposes of Government                 Pastoral Peoples                              U3 USHG Era 3
     C3 Structure and Functions of                                                           Revolution and the New Nation 1754-1800
     Government                                W3 WHG Era 3
     C4 Relationship of the United States to   Classical Traditions, World Religions, and    U4 USHG Era 4
     Other Nations and World Affairs           Major Empires                                 Expansion and Reform 1792-1861

     ECONOMICS                                 W4 WHG Era 4                                  U5 USHG Era 5
     E1 The Market Economy                     Case Studies from Three Continents            Civil War and Reconstruction 1850-1877
     E2 The National Economy
     E3 International Economy                  EMBEDDED IN THE CONTEXT OF                    EMBEDDED IN THE CONTEXT OF
                                               HISTORY:                                      HISTORY:
     PUBLIC DISCOURSE,
     DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC                GEOGRAPHY                                     G Geographic Perspective
     PARTICIPATION                             G1 The World in Spatial Terms                 • The World in Spatial Terms
      • Identifying and Analyzing Public       G4 Human Systems                              • Places and Regions
        Issues                                 G5 Environment and Society                    • Human Systems
      • Persuasive Communication               G6 Global Issues                              • Physical Systems
      • Civic Participation                                                                  • Environment and Society
                                               PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND CIVIC
                                               PARTICIPATION                                 C Civic Perspective
                                                • Identifying and Analyzing Public            • Conceptual Foundations
                                                  Issues                                      • Role and Functions of Government
                                                • Persuasive Communication                    • Purposes of Government
                                                • Civic Participation                         • Values and Principles of American
                                                                                                Democracy
                                                                                              • Role of the Citizen in American
                                                                                                Democracy

                                                                                             E Economic Perspective
                                                                                              • Individual, Business, and Government
                                                                                                Choices
                                                                                              • Competitive Markets
                                                                                              • Prices, Supply, and Demand
                                                                                              • Role of Government
                                                                                              • Economic Interdependence

                                                                                             P PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION
                                                                                             MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION
                                                                                              • Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
                                                                                              • Persuasive Communication
                                                                                              • Civic Participation




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                       		                          MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                 51

                             THE ARC OF INQUIRY: GRADES 6-8

Dimension 1: Developing Questions and Planning Inquiries Central to a rich social studies experience
is the capability for developing questions that can frame and advance an inquiry. Those questions come in
two forms: compelling and supporting questions.
Individually and collaboratively, students construct compelling questions and:
     • explain why compelling questions are important to others (e.g., peers, adults).
     • identify disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question that are open to
         different interpretations.
     • identify the disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a supporting question that are open to
         interpretation.
     • explain how supporting questions help answer compelling questions in an inquiry.
     • determine the kinds of sources that will be helpful in answering compelling and supporting questions,
         taking into consideration the different opinions people have about how to answer the questions.
Dimension 2: Applying Disciplinary Concepts and Tools The four disciplines within social studies
provide the intellectual context for studying how humans have interacted with each other and with the
environment over time. Each of these disciplines — civics, economics, geography, and history — offers a
unique way of thinking and organizing knowledge as well as systems for verifying knowledge. Dimension
2 focuses on the disciplinary concepts and tools students need to understand and apply as they study the
specific content described in Michigan’s state standards.
Dimension 3: Evaluating Sources and Using Evidence Dimension 3 includes the skills students need
to analyze information and come to conclusions in an inquiry. These skills focus on gathering and evaluating
sources, and then developing claims and using evidence to support these claims.
Individually and collaboratively, students:
     • gather relevant information from multiple sources while using the origin, structure, and context to
         guide the selection.
     • use distinctions among fact and opinion to determine the credibility of multiple sources.
     • identify evidence that draws information from multiple sources in response to compelling questions.
     • use evidence to develop claims in response to compelling questions.
Dimension 4: Communicating Conclusions and Taking Informed Action Students should construct
and communicate claims for a variety of purposes and audiences. These audiences may range from the
school classroom to the larger public community.
Individually and collaboratively, students:
     • construct arguments using claims and evidence from multiple sources.
     • construct explanations using reasoning, correct sequence, examples, and details with relevant
         information and data.
     • present a summary of arguments and explanations to others outside the classroom using print and
         oral technologies (posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, and reports) and digital technologies
         (Internet, social media, digital documentary).
     • critique arguments.
     • critique explanations.
     • draw on disciplinary concepts to explain the challenges people have faced and opportunities they have
         created, in addressing local, regional, and global problems at various times and places.
     • explain different strategies and approaches that students and others could take in working alone
         and together to address local, regional, and global problems, and predict possible results of their
         actions.
     • use a range of deliberative and democratic procedures to make decisions about and act on civic
         problems in their classrooms and schools.
52

          SOCIAL STUDIES PROCESS AND SKILLS STANDARDS: GRADES 6-8

     P1 READING AND COMMUNICATION – READ AND COMMUNICATE EFFECTIVELY

     P1.1 Use appropriate strategies to read and interpret basic social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps,
     and texts.

     P1.2 Interpret primary and secondary source documents for point of view, context, bias, and frame of ref-
     erence or perspective.

     P1.3 Express social science ideas clearly in written, spoken, and graphic forms, including tables, line
     graphs, bar graphs, pie charts, maps, and images.

     P1.4 Present an argument supported with evidence.

     P2 INQUIRY, RESEARCH, AND ANALYSIS

     P2.1 Use compelling and supporting questions to investigate social scientific problems.

     P2.2 Evaluate data presented in social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and texts.

     P2.3 Know how to find, organize, and interpret information from a variety of sources.

     P2.4 Use resources in multiple forms and from multiple perspectives to analyze issues.

     P3 PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND DECISION MAKING

     P3.1 Clearly state an issue as a question of public policy, gather and interpret information about that is-
     sue, and generate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.

     P3.2 Discuss public policy issues, clarifying position, considering opposing views, and applying Democratic
     Values or Constitutional Principles to develop and refine claims.

     P3.3 Construct arguments expressing and justifying decisions on public policy issues supported with evi-
     dence.

     P3.4 Explain the challenges people have faced and actions they have taken to address issues at different
     times and places.

     P4 CIVIC PARTICIPATION

     P4.1 Act out of the rule of law and hold others to the same standard.

     P4.2 Assess options for individuals and groups to plan and conduct activities intended to advance views on
     matters of public policy.

     P4.3 Plan, conduct, and evaluate the effectiveness of activities intended to advance views on matters of
     public policy.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		             		                  MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                    53

                                  WORLD GEOGRAPHY: GRADE 6

Sixth-grade students will explore the tools and mental constructs used by geographers as they study
contemporary world geography. Contemporary civics/government and economics content is integrated throughout
the year. As a capstone, the students will conduct an investigation of a global issue. Using knowledge, research,
and inquiry, they will analyze an issue and propose a plan for the future, including a persuasive essay.




GEOGRAPHY
G1         The World in Spatial Terms: Geographical Habits of Mind (Foundational for Grade 7)
           1.1     Spatial Thinking
           1.2     Geographical Inquiry and Analysis
           1.3     Geographical Understanding
G2         Places and Regions
           2.1     Physical Characteristics of Place
           2.2     Human Characteristics of Place
G3         Physical Systems
           3.1     Physical Processes
           3.2     Ecosystems
G4         Human Systems
           4.1     Cultural Mosaic
           4.2     Technology Patterns and Networks
           4.3     Patterns of Human Settlement
           4.4     Forces of Cooperation and Conflict
G5         Environment and Society
           5.1     Humans and the Environment
           5.2     Physical and Human Systems
G6         Global Issues
           6.1     Global Topic Investigation and Issue Analysis
CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
C1         Purposes of Government
           1.1     Nature of Civic Life, Politics, and Government
C3         Structure and Functions of Government
           3.6     Characteristics of Nation-States
C4         Relationship of United States to Other Nations and World Affairs
           4.3     Conflict and Cooperation Between and Among Nations
ECONOMICS
E1         The Market Economy
           1.1     Individual, Business, and Government Choices
E2         The National Economy
           2.3     Role of Government
E3         The International Economy
           3.1     Economic Systems
           3.3     Economic Interdependence
PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION

                       Sample World Geography Compelling and Supporting Question
     6th            How do      1) How have cultural ideas diffused among different places?
                   diffusion,   2) Why do people engage in trade?
                  trade, and
                   migration    3) Why do people migrate among different countries?
                affect people   Standards Connection: 6 – G1.2.3, 6 – G1.3.1, 6 – G2.2.1, 6 – G2.2.2,
                 in different   6 – G4.1.1, 6 – G4.1.3, 6 – G4.1.4, 6 – G4.2.1, 6 – G4.3.3, 6 – G4.4.1
                    places?
54

                                   WORLD GEOGRAPHY: GRADE SIX

     GEOGRAPHY
     G1 THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS: GEOGRAPHICAL HABITS OF MIND
     The use of technology has dramatically enhanced the ability of teachers and students to
     see the world in different ways. Geo-spatial technology includes geographic information
     systems (GIS), remote sensing, and global positioning systems (GPS), and the ability to
     look at places all around the world has allowed students to do geography, not just learn it.
     Learning how to use technology is only part of learning to think spatially. Geographically
     literate people: know about our complex interconnected world; understand science and
     social science concepts; use maps, data and geo-spatial technologies; and use spatial
     reasoning. Spatial reasoning involves the following: looking at patterns; analyzing con-
     nections between places; understanding how the conditions at one place can be similar
     or very different from another; trying to understand how location is important; and see-
     ing why some characteristics tend to occur together in places.
     Geographers also look at the world with an ecological perspective. What are the relation-
     ships within ecosystems, and what role do humans have in using, modifying, and adapt-
     ing to different environments from a local to global scale?
     G1.1 Spatial Thinking
      Use maps and other geographic tools to acquire and process information from a spatial
     perspective.
        6 – G1.1.1    Use a variety of geographic tools (maps, globes, and web-based geog-
        raphy technology) to analyze the world at global, regional, and local scales.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: looking for the significance of
        location, making comparisons among places and regions, identifying spatial patterns
        and comparing patterns, exploring how places and people are connected as well as
        how people are part of, use, and impact the environment. Spatial analysis can also
        involve looking at an issue at different scales in order to provide different insights.
        6 – G1.1.2    Draw a sketch map, or add information to an outline map, of the world
        or a world region.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: locate the following on a world
        map: the United States, North and South America, Africa, Europe, and Asia; conti-
        nents; oceans; and latitude lines — equator, Prime Meridian, tropics of Cancer and
        Capricorn, Arctic and Antarctic circles using Geographic Information Systems (GIS),
        drawing, or web-based programs.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             55
G1.2 Geographical Inquiry and Analysis
  Use skills of geographic inquiry and analysis to answer important questions about re-
lationships between people, their cultures, and their environments, in their communities
and within the larger world context. Students use information to make reasoned judg-
ments based on the authenticity of the information, critically analyze the information,
and present the results.
   6 – G1.2.1    Apply the skills of geographic inquiry (asking geographic questions,
   acquiring geographic information, organizing geographic information, analyzing geo-
   graphic information, and answering geographic questions) to analyze a geographic
   problem or issue.
   6 – G1.2.2    Explain why maps of the same place may vary, including the perspec-
   tives and purposes of the cartographers.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: different countries may label dis-
   puted territories differently, remote sensing images provide information not visible to
   humans.
   6 – G1.2.3     Use, interpret, and create maps and graphs representing population
   characteristics, natural features, and land use of the region under study.
   6 – G1.2.4  Use images as the basis for answering geographic questions about the
   human and physical characteristics of places and major world regions.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: pictures, aerial photos, and re-
   mote sensing images.
   6 – G1.2.5   Locate and use information from GIS and satellite remote sensing to
   answer geographic questions.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: Google Earth and ArcGIS on-line
   have multiple teacher applications. Clickable PDFs provide overlay strategies for stu-
   dents without technology skills.
   6 – G1.2.6    Create or interpret a map of the population distribution of a region and
   generalize about the factors influencing the distribution of the population.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: how natural characteristics are
   associated with sparse population densities, how different combinations of natural
   and human factors lead to different densities, and why major cities are located where
   they are.
56
     G1.3 Geographical Understanding
      The purpose of middle school geography curriculum is to develop content, themes, skills,
     and perspectives that can help students understand a diverse and interconnected world.
        6 – G1.3.1    Use the fundamental themes of geography (location, place, human-en-
        vironment interaction, movement, region) to describe regions or places on earth.
        Examples may include but are not limited to:
         • “place” deals with the natural and human characteristics of a place while “loca-
           tion” deals with where the place is, especially relative to other places.
         • “human-environment interaction” deals with resources, human adaptation, and
           human impact, as well as natural catastrophes.
         • “movement” includes migration of people, transportation of goods and services,
           and the diffusion of information, as well as the movement of material in natural
           cycles, such as water through hydrology.
         • “regions” are generalizations about the common characteristics of areas.
        6 – G1.3.2    Explain the different ways in which places are connected and how
        those connections demonstrate interdependence and accessibility.
     G2 PLACES AND REGIONS
     Describe the cultural groups and diversities among people who are rooted in particular
     places and in human constructs called regions. Analyze the physical and human charac-
     teristics of places and regions.
     G2.1 Physical Characteristics of Places
      Describe the physical characteristics of places.
        6 – G2.1.1     Locate and describe the basic patterns of landforms.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: patterns at a continental scale or
        larger.
        6 – G2.1.2     Locate and describe the basic patterns and processes of plate tectonics.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: the location of continental plates
        and the Ring of Fire. Processes include plate movement, uplift, earthquakes, and vol-
        canism.
        6 – G2.1.3    Locate and describe the characteristics and patterns of major world
        climates and ecosystems.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: tropical wet and tropical wet-dry,
        arid and semi-arid, sub-tropical, continental, and arctic climates. Ecosystems include
        tropical rain forest, savanna, grassland, desert, temperate and coniferous forests,
        tundra, oceans, and ice caps.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		             MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             57
G2.2 Human Characteristics of Places
  Describe the human characteristics of places.
   6 – G2.2.1    Describe the human characteristics of the region under study, including
   languages, religions, economic system, governmental system, cultural traditions.
   6 – G2.2.2    Explain how communities are affected positively or negatively by
   changes in technology.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: how changes in transportation
   and communication technology influence where people live, how changes in manu-
   facturing influence where factories are located, and how changes in energy technol-
   ogy reduce or increase economic activity and environmental impact. Examples also
   include negative impacts on communities, such as job loss when a technology chang-
   es and economic activities move.
   6 – G2.2.3    Explain how culture and experience influence people’s perceptions of
   places and regions.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: how an immigrant and a resident
   might view a community, how a tourist might see a culture differently than someone
   who was born and lives there, and how international travel might change a person’s
   perspective.
   6 – G2.2.4     Interpret population pyramids from different countries including birth
   rates, death rates, male-female differences, and the causes and consequences of the
   age structure of the population.
   6 – G2.2.5   Generalize about how human and natural factors have influenced how
   people make a living and perform other activities in a place.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: how physical features, including
   mountains, rivers, coasts, deserts, and natural resources, as well as human factors
   such as political boundaries and accessibility, can affect community size and location.
   Additional examples might include how groups of people with different levels of eco-
   nomic or political power might choose or be restricted to different locations.
G3 PHYSICAL SYSTEMS
Describe the physical processes that shape the Earth’s surface that, along with plants
and animals, are the basis for both sustaining and modifying ecosystems. Identify and
analyze the patterns and characteristics of the major ecosystems on Earth.
G3.1 Physical Processes
Describe the physical processes that shape the patterns of the Earth’s surface.
   6 – G3.1.1    Interpret and compare climographs from different latitudes and
   locations.
   Examples include but are not limited to: how latitude and elevation impact
   South American ecosystems, how latitude and seasons affect African ecosystems,
   and how climate change impacts ecosystems.
58
        6 – G3.1.2     Explain the factors that cause different climate types.
     G3.2 Ecosystems
      Describe the characteristics and spatial distribution of ecosystems on Earth’s surface.
        6 – G3.2.1     Locate major ecosystems and explain how and why they are similar or
        different as a consequence of latitude, elevation, land-forms, location, and human
        activity.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: deciduous forest versus prairies in
        the United States, tropical rain forest versus savanna and desert in Africa, and tun-
        dra versus coniferous forests in Canada or Russia.
     G4 HUMAN SYSTEMS
     Explain that human activities may be seen on Earth’s surface. Human systems include
     the way people divide the land, decide where to live, develop communities that are part
     of the larger cultural mosaic, and engage in the cultural diffusion of ideas and products
     within and among groups.
     G4.1 Cultural Mosaic
      Describe the characteristics, distribution, and complexity of Earth’s cultural mosaic.
        6 – G4.1.1     Define culture and describe examples of cultural change through dif-
        fusion, including what has diffused, why and where it has spread, and positive and
        negative consequences of the change.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: describing the spread of busi-
        nesses such as fast food franchises, sports like karate or soccer, products like athletic
        shoes, languages like English, or diseases like the Zika virus.
        6 – G4.1.2     Compare and contrast the gender roles assigned to men and women in
        different societies.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: how different religions and/or na-
        tions assign, expect, or require different roles for men and women, such as who can
        vote, own property, or hold office. Note that gender roles are culturally defined and
        vary widely. Within a culture, the majority of traditional roles have varying degrees
        of acceptance and change over time.
        6 – G4.1.3   Describe cultures of the region being studied, including the major lan-
        guages and religions.
        6 – G4.1.4     Explain how culture influences the daily lives of people.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: how people make a living, raise
        families, educate children and practice their religion in different cultures and commu-
        nities.
     G4.2 Technology Patterns and Networks
      Describe how technology creates patterns and networks that connect people, resourc-
     es, products, and ideas.

 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                               59
   6 – G4.2.1      Identify and describe the advantages, disadvantages, and impacts
   of different technologies used to transport people and products, and spread ideas
   throughout the world.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the advantages and disadvan-
   tages of trucks, trains, ships, and planes for transporting people and/or material;
   the advantages and disadvantages of print, radio, television, the Internet, and social
   media for moving information.
G4.3 Patterns of Human Settlement
  Describe patterns, processes, and functions of human settlement.
   6 – G4.3.1    Explain how people have modified the environment and used technol-
   ogy to make places more suitable for humans, as well as how modifications some-
   times have negative/unintended consequences.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: recovering land in the Nether-
   lands, irrigating deserts or clearing forests for agriculture, and using air conditioning
   in the southern United States. A technology example might be how irrigation tech-
   nology changed farming in the Great Plains or how the Green Revolution changed
   farming in Asia.
   6 – G4.3.2   Describe patterns of settlement and explain why people settle where
   they do and how people make their livings.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: coastal and river towns in the
   past and present, the location of mega-cities, and how people make their livings in
   different locations. Examples also include forced settlement and/or restrictions on
   resettlement.
   6 – G4.3.3    Explain the patterns, causes, and consequences of major human
   migrations.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: refugee migrations, economic mi-
   grations, seasonal migration, and migrations from rural to urban.
G4.4 Forces of Cooperation and Conflict
  Explain how forces of cooperation and conflict among people influence the division of
the Earth’s surface and its resources.
   6 – G4.4.1   Identify factors that contribute to cooperation and conflict between and
   among cultural groups (control/use of natural resources, power, wealth, and cultural
   diversity).
   6 – G4.4.2    Evaluate examples of cooperation and conflict within the region under
   study from different perspectives.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: cooperation between the United
   States and Canada to protect the fresh water of the Great Lakes, cooperation efforts
   to stop the spread of diseases among populations, or conflict over control of islands
   in the South China Sea.
60
     G5 ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETY
     Explain that the physical environment is modified by human activities, which are influ-
     enced by the ways in which human societies value and use the Earth’s natural resources,
     and by Earth’s physical features and processes. Explain how human action modifies the
     physical environment and how physical systems affect human systems.
     G5.1 Humans and the Environment
       Describe how humans use and modify the environment.
        6 – G5.1.1    Describe examples of how humans have impacted and are continuing
        to impact the environment in different places as a consequence of population size,
        resource use, level of consumption, and technology.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: how population pressure impacts
        deforestation in Brazil, how higher standards of living increase pollution in China,
        how the use of plastics in the United States can impact water resources, and how
        use of fossil fuels leads to climate change.
        6 – G5.1.2    Explain how different technologies can have positive and negative im-
        pacts on the environment.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: water management, energy ex-
        amples include advantages and disadvantages of wind and solar power generation,
        as well as fracking and tar sands mining; transportation examples might include road
        and rail transportation and expansion of cities; agricultural examples might include
        terracing, deforestation, or the use of pesticides and herbicides.
        6 – G5.1.3   Analyze ways in which human-induced changes in the physical envi-
        ronment in one place can cause changes in other places.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: how cutting forests in one region
        may result in flooding downstream, how plastic litter in the watershed leads to lake
        and ocean pollution, how over-fertilization and phosphate use can lead to changes
        in water quality, and how different factors lead to global climate change, which may
        impact regions differently.
        6 – G5.1.4    Define natural resources and explain how people in different places
        use, define, and acquire resources in different ways.
     G5.2 Physical and Human Systems
     Describe how physical and human systems shape patterns on the Earth’s surface.
        6 – G5.2.1   Analyze the effects that a change in the physical environment could
        have on human activities and the actions people would be required to make (or
        would choose to make) in response to the change.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: how drought in Africa and Syria is
        leading to emigration, how coral bleaching is leading to reduced tourism in Australia
        and the Caribbean, how earthquakes are leading to revised building codes, or how
        sea level rise is leading to coastal flooding and barrier construction.


 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		   		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                           61
   6 – G5.2.2     Analyze how combinations of human decisions and natural forces can
   lead to (or help people avoid) a natural disaster.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: how building in flood plains in-
   creases the likelihood of a natural disaster, and how the federal Soil Conservation
   Service works to prevent a natural disaster, such as the Dust Bowl.
G6 GLOBAL ISSUES
A global issue is one that has an impact affecting many regions of the world.
G6.1 Global Topic Investigation and Issue Analysis
   6 – G6.1.1    Identify global issues.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: natural disasters, immigration,
   food production, food distribution, the impact of climate change, population growth,
   resource use and depletion, meeting the needs of refugees, migration, poverty, eco-
   nomic development, conflict, and terrorism.
   6 – G6.1.2     Investigate a contemporary global issue by applying the skills of geo-
   graphic inquiry.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: asking geographic questions;
   acquiring, organizing, and analyzing geographic information; answering geographic
   questions when practical; using inquiry methods to acquire content knowledge and
   appropriate data about the issue; identifying the causes and consequences and ana-
   lyzing the impact, both positive and negative.
   6 – G6.1.3    Develop a plan for action:
    • share and discuss findings of research and issue analysis in group discussions
      and debates.
    • compose a persuasive essay justifying a position with a reasoned argument.
    • develop an action plan to address or inform others about the issue, at local to
      global scales.
62
     CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
     C1 PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT
     Analyze how people identify, organize, and accomplish the purposes of government.
     C1.1 Nature of Civic Life, Politics, and Government
      Describe civic life, politics, and government and explain their relationships.
        6 – C1.1.1     Compare and contrast different ideas about the purposes of govern-
        ment in different nations, nation-states or governments.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: protecting individual rights,
        promoting the common good, providing economic security, molding the character of
        citizens, or promoting a particular religion. Purposes may also include keeping an
        ethnic group or party in power. Governments may include those of nation-states,
        newly independent states, emerging states, and other governmental entities such
        as tribal governments.
     C3 STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT
     Explain that governments are structured to serve the people. Describe the major activi-
     ties of government, including making and enforcing laws, providing services and benefits
     to individuals and groups, assigning individual and collective responsibilities, generating
     revenue, and providing national security.
     C3.6 Characteristics of Nation-States
       Describe the characteristics of nation-states and how they may interact.
        6 – C3.6.1     Define the characteristics of modern nation-states.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: a specific territory, clearly defined
        boundaries, citizens, collect taxes and provide services, jurisdiction over people who
        reside there, laws, and government.
        6 – C3.6.2     Compare and contrast various forms of government around the world.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: democracies, parliamentary sys-
        tems, dictatorships, oligarchies, and theocracies.
     C4 RELATIONSHIP OF UNITED STATES TO OTHER GOVERNMENTS, WORLD
     ISSUES, AND WORLD GOVERNING ORGANIZATIONS
     Explain ways in which governments interact with one another through trade, diplomacy,
     treaties and agreements, humanitarian aid, economic sanctions and incentives, military
     force, and the threat of force.
     C4.3 Conflict and Cooperation Between and Among Nations
      Explain the various ways that governments interact both positively and negatively.
        6 – C4.3.1     Explain how governments address national and international issues
        and form policies, and how the policies may not be consistent with those of other
        nation-states.

 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                            63
   Examples may include but are not limited to: climate change, and human and
   civil rights; within the United States, federal/tribal relations in the United States.
   6 – C4.3.2     Explain the challenges to governments to address global issues, and
   the international cooperation needed to do so.
   6 – C4.3.3    Analyze the impact of treaties, agreements, and international organi-
   zations on global issues.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the North American Free Trade
   Agreement (NAFTA) or subsequent agreements, the North Atlantic Treaty Organiza-
   tion (NATO), the Organization of American States (OAS), the United Nations (UN),
   the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and the Paris Climate Accord.
ECONOMICS
E1 THE MARKET ECONOMY
Describe the market economy in terms of the relevance of limited resources, how indi-
viduals and institutions make and evaluate decisions, the role of incentives, how buyers
and sellers interact to create markets, how markets allocate resources, and the econom-
ic role of government in a market economy.
E1.1 Individual, Business, and Government Choices
 Describe how individuals, businesses, and government make economic decisions when
confronting scarcity or surpluses in the market economy.
   6 – E1.1.1   Explain how incentives and disincentives in the market economy can
   change the decision-making process.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: acquiring money, profit, and
   goods; wanting to avoid loss of position in society; job placement; taxes on ciga-
   rettes to discourage smoking; raising prices to increase profit.
E2 THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
Use economic concepts, terminology, and data to identify and describe how a national
economy functions and to study the role of government as a provider of goods and ser-
vices within a national economy.
E2.3 Role of Government
 Describe how national governments make decisions that affect the national economy.
   6 – E2.3.1    Analyze the impact of sanctions, tariffs, treaties, quotas, and
   subsidies.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: implications of economic sanc-
   tions on all countries involved.
64
     E3 INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY
     Analyze reasons for individuals and businesses to specialize and trade, why individuals
     and businesses trade across international borders, and the comparisons of the benefits
     and costs of specialization and the resulting trade for consumers, producers, and gov-
     ernments.
     E3.1 Economic Systems
      Describe how societies organize to allocate resources to produce and distribute goods
     and services.
        6 – E3.1.1     Explain and compare how economic systems (traditional, command,
        market) answer the three basic economic questions: What goods and services will be
        produced? How will they be produced? For whom will they be produced? Also, who
        will receive the benefits or bears the costs of production?
        6 – E3.1.2      Compare and contrast the economic and ecological costs and benefits
        of different kinds of energy production.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: oil, coal, natural gas, nuclear, bio-
        mass, solar, hydroelectric, geothermal, wind, and the impact of each.
     E3.3 Economic Interdependence
      Describe patterns and networks of economic interdependence, including trade.
        6 – E3.3.1     Use charts and graphs to compare imports and exports of different
        countries in the world and propose generalizations about patterns of economic inter-
        dependence.
        6 – E3.3.2   Diagram or map the flow of materials, labor, and capital used to pro-
        duce a consumer product.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: global supply chain, computer
        production, automobile production.
        6 – E3.3.3   Explain how communication innovations have affected economic inter-
        actions and where and how people work.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: Internet-based home offices, in-
        ternational work teams, international companies, online shopping.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		   		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                               65
PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION (P3, P4)
P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Issues, Decision Making, Persuasive
Communication About a Global Issue, and Civic Participation
   6 – P3.1.1      Integrate Michigan process and skills standards into a grade-appro-
   priate project. Clearly state a global issue as a question of public policy, trace the
   origins of the issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate alter-
   native resolutions. Identify public policy issues related to global topics and issues
   studied. For example:
    • use Michigan social studies process and skills methods to acquire content knowl-
      edge and appropriate data about the issue.
    • identify the causes and consequences and analyze the impact, both positive and
      negative.
    • share and discuss findings of research and issue analysis in group discussions
      and debates.
    • compose a persuasive essay justifying a position with a reasoned argument.
    • develop an action plan to address or inform others about the issue at a local,
      national, or global scale.
P4.2 Civic Participation
 Act constructively to further the public good.
   6 – P4.2.1     Demonstrate knowledge of how, when, and where individuals would
   plan and conduct activities intended to advance views in matters of public policy, re-
   port the results, and evaluate effectiveness.
   6 – P4.2.2     Engage in activities intended to contribute to solving the local, national
   or global issues studied.
   6 – P4.2.3    Participate in projects to help or inform others.
66

                            WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY: GRADE 7

     Seventh-grade students will review the tools and mental constructs used by historians and geographers. They will
     develop an understanding of World History, Eras 1–4. Geography, Civics/Government, and Economics content is
     integrated throughout the year. As a capstone, the students will conduct investigations about past and present
     global issues. Using significant content knowledge, research, and inquiry, they will analyze the issue and propose a
     plan for the future. As part of the inquiry, they will compose civic, persuasive essays using reasoned argument.


      HISTORY
      H1         The World in Temporal Terms: Historical Habits of Mind
                 1.1    Temporal Thinking
                 1.2    Historical Inquiry and Analysis
                 1.4    Historical Understanding
      W1         WHG Era 1 – The Beginnings of Human Society
                 1.1    Peopling of Earth
                 1.2    Agricultural Revolution
      W2         WHG Era 2 – Early Civilizations and Cultures and the Emergence of Pastoral Peoples
                 2.1    Early Civilizations and Early Pastoral Societies
      W3         WHG Era 3 – Classical Traditions, World Religions, and Major Empires
                 3.1    Classical Traditions in Regions of the Eastern and Western Hemispheres
                 3.2    Growth and Development of World Religions
      W4         WHG Era 4 – Bridge to Era 4: Case Studies From Three Continents
                 4.1    Crisis in the Classical World
                 4.2    Africa to 1500 CE
                 4.3    North America to 1500 CE
      GEOGRAPHY
      G1         The World in Spatial Terms: Geographical Habits of Mind
                 (Foundational Expectations Addressed in Grade 6)
                 G1.2   Geographical Inquiry and Analysis

      G4         Human Systems
                 G4.1  Cultural Mosaic
                 G4.2  Technology Patterns and Networks
                 G4.3  Patterns of Human Settlement
                 G4.4  Forces of Conflict and Cooperation

      G5         Environment and Society
                 G5.1   Humans and the Environment

      G6         Global Issues
                 G6.1    Inquiry and Analysis
      PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT
      P3         Identifying and Analyzing Issues, Decision Making, Persuasive Communication About a Public
                 Issue, and Citizen Involvement
      P4         Civic Participation


                      Sample World History and Geography Compelling and Supporting Question
           7th           How does      1) How do we learn about the past?
                         historical    2) Does thinking about the world with historical habits of mind help to make a
                       thinking help   better world?
                      us understand
                        our world?     3) What steps and tools do historians use to do their job?
                                       4) How do historians collect and analyze evidence?
                                       5) How do historians use evidence to construct theories, perspectives and
                                       hypotheses (claims), and accounts about the past?
                                       Standards Connection: 7 – H1.1.1, 7 – H1.2.1, 7 – H1.2.2, 7 – H1.2.3,
                                       7 – H1.2.4, 7 – H1.2.5, 7 – H1.2.6


 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                   		                   MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                              67

                  WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY: GRADE SEVEN

HISTORY
H1 THE WORLD IN TEMPORAL TERMS: HISTORICAL HABITS OF MIND
Evaluate evidence, compare and contrast information, interpret the historical record,
and develop sound historical arguments and perspectives on which informed decisions in
contemporary life can be based.
H1.1 Temporal Thinking
 Use historical conceptual devices to organize and study the past.
   7 – H1.1.1    Compare and contrast several different calendar systems used in the
   past and present and their cultural significance.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: sundial; lunar solar; Gregorian
   calendar: BC/AD; contemporary secular: BCE/CE; Chinese; Hebrew; Islamic/Hijri.
H1.2 Historical Inquiry and Analysis
 Use historical inquiry and analysis to study the past.
   7 – H1.2.1    Explain how historians use a variety of sources to explore the past.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: artifacts, primary and secondary
   sources including narratives, technology, historical maps, visual/mathematical quan-
   titative data, radiocarbon dating, and DNA analysis.
   7 – H1.2.2    Read and comprehend a historical passage to identify basic factual
   knowledge and the literal meaning by indicating who was involved, what happened,
   where it happened, what events led to the development, and what consequences or
   outcomes followed.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: a wide range of Document-Based
   Questions (DBQs) are available to develop case studies appropriate to the era in both
   AfroEurasia and the Americas.
   7 – H1.2.3    Identify the point of view (perspective of the author) and context when
   reading and discussing primary and secondary sources.
   7 – H1.2.4    Compare and evaluate differing historical perspectives based on evi-
   dence.
   7 – H1.2.5     Describe how historians use methods of inquiry to identify cause/effect
   relationships in history, noting that many have multiple causes.
   7 – H1.2.6    Identify the role of the individual in history and the significance of one
   person’s ideas.
68
     H1.4 Historical Understanding
       Use historical concepts, patterns, and themes to study the past.
           7 – H1.4.1                 Describe and use cultural institutions to study an era and a region.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: political and economic institu-
           tions, religion and beliefs, science and technology, written language, education, and
           family structure.
           7– H1.4.2                  Describe and use themes of history to study patterns of change and
           continuity.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: several lists of history themes
           are available, including: SPEC (social, political, economic, and cultural) and the
           World History For Us All1 themes (Patterns of Population; Economic Networks and
           Exchange; Uses and Abuses of Power; Haves and Have-Nots; Expressing Identity;
           Science, Technology, and the Environment; and Spiritual Life and Moral Codes).
           7 – H1.4.3    Use historical perspectives to analyze global issues faced by humans
           long ago and today.
     W1 WHG ERA 1 – THE BEGINNINGS OF HUMAN SOCIETY: BEGINNINGS TO
     4000 BCE
     Explain the basic features of and differences between hunter-gatherer societies and
     pastoral nomads. Analyze and explain the geographic, environmental, biological, and
     cultural processes that influenced the rise of the earliest human communities, the migra-
     tion and spread of people throughout the world, and the causes and consequences of the
     growth of agriculture.
     W1.1 Peopling of Earth
       Describe the spread of people during Era 1.
           7 – W1.1.1     Explain how and when human communities populated major regions
           of the world and adapted to a variety of environments.
           7 – W1.1.2        Explain what archaeologists have learned about Paleolithic and Neo-
           lithic societies.
     W1.2 Agricultural Revolution
       Describe the Agricultural Revolution and explain why it was a turning point in history.
           7 – W1.2.1     Describe the transition of many cultures from hunter-gatherers to sed-
           entary agriculture (domestication of plants and animals).
           7 – W1.2.2      Explain the importance of the natural environment in the development
           of agricultural settlements in different locations.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: the importance of available water
           for irrigation, adequate precipitation, fertile soil, locally available plants and animals,
           and adequate growing seasons.
     1         World History For Us All is a project of the National Center for History in the Schools at UCLA in cooperation with San Diego State University. See their
     work on themes at their website.

 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                                       		                            MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                              69
   7 – W1.2.3     Explain the impact of the first Agricultural Revolution (stable food sup-
   ply, surplus, population growth, trade, division of labor, development of settlements,
   changes to the environment, and changes to hunter-gatherer societies).
WHG ERA 2 – EARLY CIVILIZATIONS AND CULTURES AND THE EMERGENCE OF
PASTORAL PEOPLES, 4000 TO 1000 BCE AND WESTERN HEMISPHERE 4000 BCE
to 1500 CE
Describe and compare defining characteristics of early civilization and pastoral societies,
where they emerged, and how they spread. This era includes civilizations in AfroEur-
asia from 4000 to 1000 BCE as well as cultures in developing the Western Hemisphere
from 4000 BCE into Eras 3 and 4 so teachers can compare early civilizations around the
globe.
W2.1 Early Civilizations and Major Empires
 Analyze early civilizations and pastoral societies.
   7 – W2.1.1      Describe the importance of the development of human communication
   (oral, visual, and written) and its relationship to the development of culture.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: standardization of physical (rock,
   bird) and abstract (love, fear) words. In addition, examples may include forms of
   non-verbal communication from pictographs to abstract writing (governmental ad-
   ministration, laws, codes, history, and artistic expressions).
   7 – W2.1.2      Describe how the invention of agriculture led to the emergence of
   agrarian civilizations (seasonal harvests, specialized crops, cultivation, and develop-
   ment of villages and towns).
   7 – W2.1.3   Use historical and modern maps and other sources to locate, describe,
   and analyze major river systems and discuss the ways these physical settings sup-
   ported permanent settlements and development of early civilizations.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the Tigris and Euphrates, Huang
   He, Nile, Indus, and Mississippi rivers.
   7 – W2.1.4   Examine early civilizations to describe their common features, includ-
   ing environment, economies, and social institutions.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the Nile, Tigris/Euphrates, and
   Indus river civilizations in deserts, and Huang He and Mississippi river valley civili-
   zations, and Mesoamerican and Andean civilizations. Topics might include ways of
   governing, stable food supplies, economic and social structures, use of resources and
   technology, division of labor, and forms of communication.
   7 – W2.1.5   Define the concept of cultural diffusion and explain how ideas and
   technology spread from one region to another.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the spread of iron; agriculture;
   and cultural changes associated with permanent settlements. Cultural diffusion in-
   volves identifying the innovation, how it is being spread, who the adopters are, and
   the intended or unintended consequences of the innovation.
70
        7 – W2.1.6    Describe pastoralism and explain how the climate and geography of
        Central Asia were linked to the rise of pastoral societies on the steppes.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: the steppes of Central Asia, the
        savannas of East Africa, the tundra of northern Eurasia, or the mountains of Tibet or
        South America.
     W3 WHG ERA 3 – CLASSICAL TRADITIONS, WORLD RELIGIONS, AND MAJOR
     EMPIRES, 1000 BCE TO 300 CE
     Analyze classical civilizations and empires and the emergence of major world religions
     and large-scale empires. During this era, innovations and social, political, and economic
     changes occurred through the emergence of classical civilizations in Africa, Eurasia, and
     the Americas. Africa and Eurasia moved in the direction of human interchange as a re-
     sult of trade, empire building, and the diffusion of skills and ideas. Similar interactions
     occurred in the Americas. Six of the world’s major faiths and ethical systems emerged
     and classical civilizations established institutions, systems of thought, and cultural styles
     that would influence neighboring peoples and endure for centuries.
     W3.1 Classical Traditions
      Analyze classical civilizations and empires and their lasting impact.
        7 – W3.1.1     Describe the characteristics that classical civilizations share.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: institutions, cultural styles, laws,
        religious beliefs and practices, and systems of thought that influenced neighboring
        peoples and have endured for several centuries.
        7 – W3.1.2     Using historic and modern maps, locate three major empires of this
        era, describe their geographic characteristics including physical features and cli-
        mates, and propose a generalization about the relationship between geographic char-
        acteristics and the development of early empires.
        7 – W3.1.3    Compare and contrast the defining characteristics of a city-state, civili-
        zation, and empire.
        7 – W3.1.4    Assess the importance of Greek ideas about democracy and citizenship
        in the development of Western political thought and institutions.
        7 – W3.1.5    Describe major achievements from Indian, Chinese, Mediterranean,
        African, Southwest and Central Asian, Mesoamerican, and Andean civilizations.
        7 – W3.1.6    Use historic and modern maps to locate and describe trade networks
        linking empires in the classical era.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: the early Silk Road.
        7 – W3.1.7   Use a case study to describe how trade integrated cultures and influ-
        enced the economy within empires.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: Assyrian and Persian Empires,
        Egypt and Nubia/Kush, Phoenician and Greek networks, early Silk Road, Mesoameri-
        can and Andean Empires.


 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                               71
   7 – W3.1.8 Describe the role of state authority, military power, taxation systems,
   and institutions of coerced labor, including slavery, in building and maintaining em-
   pires.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the Chin and Han Dynasties, the
   Mauryan Empire, Egypt, Greek city-states, the Roman Empire, as well as the Aztec,
   Mayan, and Incan Empires.
   7 – W3.1.9   Describe the significance of legal codes, belief systems, written lan-
   guages, and communications in the development of large regional empires.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: Mesopotamian Empires: cune-
   iform, Code of Hammurabi; the Ten Commandments, the Tang Code; the Roman
   Justinian Code; Indian Empires: Sanskrit; Nile River Empires: hieroglyphs; Chinese
   Empire: character writing, belief system of Confucianism, Daoism, Legalism; Ameri-
   can Empires: Incan knot language, Mayan codices.
   7 – W3.1.10 Create a timeline that illustrates the rise and fall of classical empires
   during the classical period.
   7 – W3.1.11 Explain the role of economics in shaping the development of classical
   civilizations and empires.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: trade routes and their signifi-
   cance, and supply and demand for products.
W3.2 Growth and Development of World Religions
  Explain how world religions or belief systems of Hinduism, Judaism, Buddhism,
Christi-anity, Confucianism, Sikhism, and Islam grew and their significance (Sikhism
and Islam are included here even though they came after 300 CE). The world’s major
faiths and ethical systems emerged, establishing institutions, systems of thought, and
cultural styles that would influence neighboring peoples and endure for centuries.
   7 – W3.2.1     Identify and describe the core beliefs of major world religions and be-
   lief systems, including Hinduism, Judaism, Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism,
   Sikhism and Islam.
   Examples may include, but are not limited to: comparing major figures, sa-
   cred texts, and basic beliefs (ethnic vs. universalizing; monotheistic vs. polytheistic)
   among religions; case studies of continuity of local indigenous belief systems or an-
   imistic religions; comparisons with religious traditions that developed after 1500 CE
   such as Protestantism.
   7 – W3.2.2   Locate the geographical center of major religions and map the spread
   through 1500 CE.
W4 WHG ERA 4 – BRIDGE TO ERA 4 – CASE STUDIES FROM THREE CONTINENTS
 Case studies from Europe, Africa, and the Americas are intended to set the stage for
Integrated U.S. History in Grade 8.
   7 – W4.1.1      Crisis in the Classical World – analyze the environmental, economic,
   and political crises in the classical world that led to the collapse of classical empires
   and the consolidation of Byzantium.
72
        Examples may include but are not limited to: the fall of Rome, collapse of the
        Mayans, demise of the Incan Empire.
        7 – W4.1.2     Africa to 1500 CE – use a case study to describe how trade integrated
        cultures and influenced the economy within early African empires.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: comparing characteristics of Ak-
        sum, Ghana, Mali, or Songhai civilizations; interpreting maps of the Trans-Saharan
        trade in gold and salt.
        7 – W4.1.3  North America to 1500 CE – use a case study to describe the culture
        and economy of Indigenous Peoples in North America prior to 1500.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: Eastern Woodland (Iroquois,
        Anishinaabek), Southeast (Cherokee, Seminole), Middle America/Mexico (Aztec),
        Southwest (Navajo, Apache), Northwest (Salish, Muckleshoot), and Great Plains (La-
        kota, Blackfeet).
     G1 THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS
     G1.2 Geographical Inquiry and Analysis
      Use geographical inquiry and analysis to answer questions about relationships between
     peoples, cultures, and their environments, and interaction among places and cultures
     within the era under study.
        7 – G1.2.1     Use a variety of geographical tools (maps, globes, geographic informa-
        tion systems [GIS], and web-based geography technology) to analyze what is hap-
        pening at different times in different locations.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: using maps to explain the Bantu
        migration patterns and describe their contributions to agriculture, technology, and
        language environments, or investigating how goods and services flowed in the Ro-
        man Empire.
        7 – G1.2.2    Apply the skills of geographic inquiry (asking geographic questions,
        acquiring geographic information, organizing geographic information, analyzing geo-
        graphic information, and answering geographic questions) to analyze a geographic
        problem or issue.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: analyzing the natural and human
        factors that limited the extent of the Roman Empire.
        7 – G1.2.3     Use, interpret, and create maps and graphs representing places and
        regions in the era being studied.
        Examples include but are not limited to: using and interpreting maps in histori-
        cal atlases, creating hand-drawn maps, and using basic GIS.
        7 – G1.2.4    Locate and use information from maps and GIS to answer geographic
        questions on the era and region being studied.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: Google Earth and ArcGIS on-line
        have multiple teacher applications. Clickable PDFs provide overlay strategies for stu-
        dents without technology skills.
 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		    		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             73
G3 INVESTIGATION AND ANALYSIS
Throughout the school year, the students are introduced to topics that address issues
that integrate time and place. Included are capstone projects that entail the investiga-
tion of historical issues that have significance for the student and are clearly linked to
the world outside the classroom. The topics and issues are developed as possible cap-
stone projects within units and at the end of the course.
G3 Investigation and Analysis (P1, P2)
   7 – G3.1.1    Investigations Designed for World History Eras 1-3 – conduct research
   on topics and issues, compose persuasive essays, and develop a plan for action.
   Era 1 Examples may include but are not limited to: population growth and re-
   sources (investigate how population growth affects resource availability) and migration
   (the significance of migrations of peoples and the resulting benefits and challenges).
   Era 2 Examples may include but are not limited to: agriculture (investigate the
   development of different forms of early or contemporary agriculture and its role in
   helping societies produce enough food for people, and the consequences of agricul-
   ture.
   Era 3 Examples may include but are not limited to: trade (investigate the im-
   pact of trade and trade routes on civilizations) or power (analyze common factors
   that influence the rise and fall of empires).
G4 HUMAN SYSTEMS
In each era, the language and perspective of geography can help students understand
the past and make comparisons with the present.
G4.2 Technology Patterns and Networks
 Describe how technology creates patterns and networks that connect people, products,
and ideas.
   7 – G4.2.1     Identify and describe the advantages, disadvantages, and impacts of
   different technologies used to transport products and ideas in the era being studied.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the development of the wheel;
   different sail, boat, and navigation technologies; road-building technologies in the
   Incan and Roman Empires; the use of horses in different cultures.
G4.3 Patterns of Human Settlement
 Describe patterns, processes, and functions of human settlement.
   7 – G4.3.1    Explain how people in the past have modified the environment and
   used technology to make places more suitable for humans.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: agricultural technologies including
   irrigation.
   7 – G4.3.2     Describe patterns of settlement and explain why people settled where
   they did.
74
        Examples may include but are not limited to: areas appropriate for hunt-
        er-gatherers or farmers, coastal and/or river towns located for trade, or mountain
        towns for defense.
        7 – G4.3.3     Explain the patterns, causes, and consequences of major human mi-
        grations.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: early human migration around
        the world, seasonal migration of pastoral people, and forced migration as a result of
        war or environmental problems.
     G4.4 Forces of Cooperation and Conflict
      Explain how forces of conflict and cooperation among people influence the division of
     the Earth’s surface and its resources.
        7 – G4.4.1   Identify factors that contribute to conflict and cooperation between and
        among cultural groups.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: conflict over natural resources,
        trade routes, or wealth.
        7 – G4.4.2     Describe examples of cooperation and conflict in the era being studied.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: conflict among Greek states and
        the Persian Empire or the expansion of the Roman Empire and the later invasions
        into the Roman Empire; examples of cooperation through trade/peaceful co-exis-
        tence include the development of early exchange routes between Europe and Asia
        and Africa.
     G5 ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETY
     Explain how humans used, adapted to, and modified the environment in the era studied.
        7 – G5.1.1    Describe examples of how humans modified the environment in the
        era being studied.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: how hunter-gatherers, farmers,
        and pastoral nomads may have used and adapted to different environments in differ-
        ent ways.
        7 – G5.1.2     Explain how different technologies were used in the era being studied.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: irrigation in major river valley
        civilizations, island creation among the Aztecs, iron technology in Africa, silk and pot-
        tery technology in China.
        7 – G5.1.3     Explain how people defined and used natural resources in the era be-
        ing studied.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             75
PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)
P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Issues, Decision Making, Persuasive
Communication about a Public Issue, and Citizen Involvement
   7 – P3.1.1     Clearly state an issue as a question of public policy in contemporary or
   historical context, or as a contemporary/historical comparison. Trace the origins of an
   issue, analyze and synthesize various perspectives, and generate and evaluate alter-
   native resolutions. Deeply examine policy issues in group discussions and debates to
   make reasoned and informed decisions. Write persuasive/argumentative essays ex-
   pressing and justifying decisions on public policy issues. Plan and conduct activities
   intended to advance views on matters of public policy, report the results, and evalu-
   ate effectiveness:
    • identify public policy issues related to global topics and issues studied.
    • clearly state the issue as a question of public policy orally or in written form.
    • use inquiry methods to acquire content knowledge and appropriate data about
      the issue.
    • identify the causes and consequences and analyze the impact, both positive and
      negative.
    • share and discuss findings of research and issue analysis in group discussions
      and debates.
    • compose a persuasive essay justifying the position with a reasoned argument.
    • develop an action plan to address or inform others about the issue at the differ-
      ent scales.
P4.2 Civic Participation
Act constructively to further the public good.
   7 – P4.2.1     Demonstrate knowledge of how, when, and where individuals would
   plan and conduct activities intended to advance views in matters of public policy, re-
   port the results, and evaluate effectiveness.
   7 – P4.2.2     Engage in activities intended to contribute to solving a national or in-
   ternational problem studied.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: service learning projects.
   7 – P4.2.3     Participate in projects to help or inform others.
76

                                 INTEGRATED U.S. HISTORY, GRADE 8

     Eighth-grade students continue their study of U.S. history from the development of the Constitution
     through Reconstruction. Geographic, civics/government, and economics content is integrated within the
     historical context under study. Students should understand the relevancy and connections of this
     history to their lives. Students will use significant content knowledge, research skills, and inquiry
     practices to analyze issues and communicate conclusions.


      INTEGRATED U.S. HISTORY, ORGANIZED BY ERA (USHG)
      Foundational Issues in USHG Eras 1-3 (Review of Grade 5 Social Studies)
      F1    Political and Intellectual Transformations

      USHG ERA 3 – REVOLUTION AND THE NEW NATION (1754-1800s)
      3.3   Creating New Government(s) and a New Constitution (introduced in Grade 5; begins Grade 8
      expectations)

      USHG ERA 4 – EXPANSION AND REFORM (1792-1861)
      4.1  Challenges to an Emerging Nation
      4.2  Regional and Economic Growth
      4.3  Reform Movements

      USHG ERA 5 – CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION (1850-1877)
      5.1  The Coming of Civil War
      5.2  Civil War
      5.3  Reconstruction

      USHG ERA 6 – THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN INDUSTRIAL, URBAN, AND GLOBAL UNITED STATES
      (1870-1898)
      6.1   America in the last half of the 19th Century (Introduced in Grade 8; begins high school USHG)
      6.2   Policy Issues in USHG Eras 3-6 (P2)

      Note: U.S. historians, history books, history standards, and the peoples themselves have used, at one time or another, “Native
      American” and “American Indian,” while Canadian history uses “First Peoples” to refer to inhabitants of North America prior to
      European exploration, conquest, and settlement. While we are using “Indigenous Peoples” throughout the content expecta-
      tions, students should be familiar with the different names and specific tribal identities as they will likely encounter variations
      over the course of their studies.




               Sample Integrated U.S. History and Geography Compelling and Supporting Question
         8th           How does         1) What kinds of growth does a new nation experience?
                        growth          2) How did the federal government protect slaveholders and slave states during
                       change a         expansion efforts in the 19th century?
                        nation?
                                        3) How did westward expansion change the geographic, social, political, economic,
                                        and cultural landscape of the United States?


                                        Standards Connection: 8 – U4.2.1, 8 – U4.2.2, 8 – U4.2.3, 8 – U4.2.4




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards                         v 6/19                   MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                           77

                        INTEGRATED U.S. HISTORY: GRADE EIGHT


FOUNDATIONS IN U.S. HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY ERAS 1-2
These foundational expectations are included to help students draw upon their previous
study of American history and connect 8th Grade U.S. History with the history studied in
5th grade.
To set the stage for the study of U.S. history that begins with the development of the
U.S. Constitution, students should be able to draw upon an understanding of these
philosophies and intellectual foundations.
F1     Political and Intellectual Transformations
     F1.1     Describe the ideas, experiences, and interactions that influenced the
     colonists’ decisions to declare independence by analyzing:
     • colonial ideas about government.
     • experiences with self-government.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: limited government,
     republicanism, protecting individual rights and promoting the common good,
     representative government, natural rights, House of Burgesses and town meetings,
     changing interactions with the royal government of Great Britain after the French
     and Indian War.
     F1.2    Using the Declaration of Independence, including the grievances at the end
     of the document, describe the role this document played in expressing:
     • colonists’ views of government.
     • their reasons for separating from Great Britain.
     F1.3    Describe the consequences of the American Revolution by analyzing and
     evaluating the relative influences of:
     • establishment of an independent republican government.
     • creation of the Articles of Confederation.
     • changing views on freedom and equality.
     • concerns over the distribution of power within government, between government
       and the governed, and among people.
78
     U3     USHG ERA 3 – REVOLUTION AND THE NEW NATION
     Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to analyze the
     institutions and practices of government created during the Revolution and how they
     were revised between 1787 and 1815 to create the foundation of the American political
     system.
     U3.3 Creating New Government(s) and a New Constitution
      Explain the challenges faced by the new nation and analyze the development of the
     Constitution as a new plan for governing (Foundations for Civics HSCE Standard 2.1).
       Note: Expectations U3.3.1 – U3.3.5 address content that was introduced in Grade 5,
       but asks for explanation and analysis at a higher level than expected in Grade 5. They
       are included here to support an in-depth discussion of the historical and philosophical
       origins of constitutional government in the United States.
          8 – U3.3.1     Explain the reasons for the adoption and subsequent failure of the
          Articles of Confederation.
          Examples may include but are not limited to: why its drafters created a weak
          central government, challenges the nation faced under the Articles, Shay’s Rebellion,
          conflicts over western lands.
          8 – U3.3.2     Identify economic, political, and cultural issues facing the nation during
          the period of the Articles of Confederation and the opening of the Constitutional
          Convention.
          8 – U3.3.3     Describe the major issues debated at the Constitutional Convention,
          including the distribution of political power among the states and within the
          federal government, the conduct of foreign affairs, commerce with tribes, rights
          of individuals, the election of the executive, and the enslavement of Africans as a
          regional and federal issue.
          8 – U3.3.4      Explain how the new Constitution resolved (or compromised) the
          major issues, including sharing and separation of power and checking of power
          among federal government institutions; dual sovereignty (state-federal power);
          rights of individuals; the Electoral College; the Three-Fifths Compromise; the Great
          Compromise; and relationships and affairs with tribal nations.
          8 – U3.3.5     Analyze the debates over the ratification of the Constitution from the
          perspectives of Federalists and Anti-Federalists and describe how the states ratified
          the Constitution.
          8 – U3.3.6    Explain how the Bill of Rights reflected the concept of limited
          government, protection of basic freedoms, and the fear among many Americans of a
          strong central government.
          8 – U3.3.7     Use important ideas and documents to describe the philosophical
          origins of constitutional government in the United States with an emphasis on
          the following ideals: social contract, limited government, natural rights, right
          of revolution, separation of powers, bicameralism, republicanism, and popular
          participation in government.

 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		       		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                 79
     Examples may include but are not limited to: the Mayflower Compact, Iroquois
     Confederacy, Common Sense, Declaration of Independence, Northwest Ordinance,
     Federalist Papers.
U4     USHG ERA 4 – EXPANSION AND REFORM (1792-1861)
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
the territorial expansion of the United States between 1801-1861, how the Industrial
Revolution, the rapid expansion of slavery, and the westward movement changed the
lives of Americans and led toward regional tensions, and the sources and character of
cultural, religious, and social reform movements during the antebellum period.
U4.1 Challenges to an Emerging Nation
 Analyze the challenges the new federal government faced and the roles of political and
social leaders in meeting those challenges.
     8 – U4.1.1    Washington’s Farewell – use President George Washington’s farewell
     address to analyze Washington’s perspective on the most significant challenges the
     new nation faced.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: deciding if and when to get
     involved in foreign conflicts, the risk of political factions, establishing the limits of
     executive power.
     8 – U4.1.2    Establishing America’s Place in the World – assess the changes in
     America’s relationships with other nations by analyzing the origins, intents, and
     purposes of treaties.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: The Jay Treaty (1795), French
     Revolution, Pinckney’s Treaty (1795), Louisiana Purchase, War of 1812, and the
     Monroe Doctrine.
     8 – U4.1.3    Challenge of Political Conflict – examine the origins and intentions of
     early American political parties, including how they emerged, who participated, and
     what influenced their ideologies.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: examine the competing ideas,
     experiences, and fears of Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton (and their
     followers), despite the worries the Founders had concerning the dangers of political
     division, by analyzing disagreements over relative power of the national government,
     the Whiskey Rebellion, Alien and Sedition Acts, foreign relations, economic policy,
     the creation of a national bank, assumption of revolutionary debt.
     8 – U4.1.4     Establishing a National Judiciary and its Power – use Marbury v.
     Madison to explain the development of the power of the Supreme Court through the
     doctrine of judicial review.
80
     U4.2 Regional and Economic Growth
      Describe and analyze the nature and impact of territorial, demographic, and economic
     growth in the first three decades of the new nation, using maps, charts, and other
     evidence.
        8 – U4.2.1    Comparing the Northeast and the South – compare and contrast
        the social and economic systems of the Northeast, the South, and the Western
        Frontier (Kentucky, Ohio Valley, etc.) with respect to geography, climate, and the
        development of:
          • agriculture, including changes in productivity, technology, supply and demand,
            and price.
          • industry, including the entrepreneurial development of new industries, such as
            textiles.
          • the labor force, including labor incentives and changes in labor forces.
          • transportation, including changes in transportation (steamboats and canal
            barges) and the impact on economic markets and prices.
          • immigration and the growth of nativism.
          • race relations.
          • class relations.
        8 – U4.2.2      The Institution of Slavery – explain the ideology of the institution of
        slavery, its policies, and consequences.
        8 – U4.2.3     Westward Expansion – analyze the annexation of the west through
        the Louisiana Purchase, the removal of Indigenous Peoples from their ancestral
        homelands, the Mexican-American War, the growth of a system of commercial
        agriculture, and the idea of Manifest Destiny.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: The Indian Removal Act of 1830
        (the Trail of Tears, the Trail of Death), the Treaty of Chicago (1833), the Treaty of
        Fort Wayne (1809).
        8 – U4.2.4     Consequences of Expansion – develop an argument based on evidence
        about the positive and negative consequences of territorial and economic expansion
        on Indigenous Peoples, efforts to maintain and sustain the institution of slavery, and
        the relations between free and slave-holding states.
     U4.3 Reform Movements
      Analyze the growth of antebellum American reform movements.
        8 – U4.3.1     Explain the origins of the American education system.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: the contributions of Benjamin
        Franklin, Benjamin Rush, Noah Webster, and Horace Mann.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                            81
     8 – U4.3.2    Describe the formation and development of the abolitionist movement
     by considering the roles of key abolitionist leaders and the response of southerners
     and northerners to the abolitionist movement.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: John Brown and the armed
     resistance, Harriet Tubman, the Underground Railroad, Sojourner Truth, Maria
     Stewart, William Lloyd Garrison, and Frederick Douglass.
     8 – U4.3.3     Analyze the antebellum women’s rights (and suffrage) movement by
     discussing the goals of its leaders and comparing primary source documents from
     this era to the Declaration of Independence.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: Susan B. Anthony, Elizabeth
     Cady Stanton; the Declaration of Sentiments, Elizabeth Cady Stanton’s Address on
     Women’s Rights (September 1848).
     8 – U4.3.4    Analyze the goals and effects of the antebellum temperance
     movement.
     8 – U4.3.5 Investigate the role of religion in shaping antebellum reform
     movements.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: differences in beliefs by different
     denominations of Christianity.
U5     USHG ERA 5 – CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION (1850-1877)
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to understand
the causes, course, and character of the Civil War and its effects on people, as well as
how various Reconstruction plans succeeded or failed.
U5.1 The Coming of the Civil War
  Analyze and evaluate the early attempts to abolish or contain slavery and to realize
  the ideals of the Declaration of Independence.
     8 – U5.1.1   Compare the differences in the lives of free black people (including
     those who escaped from slavery) with the lives of free white people and enslaved
     people.
     8 – U5.1.2    Describe the impact of the Northwest Ordinance on the expansion of
     slavery.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: the establishment of free states,
     including Michigan, as a result of the Northwest Ordinance.
     8 – U5.1.3   Describe the competing views of John C. Calhoun, Daniel Webster, and
     Henry Clay on the nature of the union among the states.
     Examples may include but are not limited to: sectionalism, nationalism,
     federalism, state rights.
82
        8 – U5.1.4     Draw conclusions about why the following increased sectional tensions:
         • the Missouri Compromise (1820).
         • the Wilmot Proviso (1846).
         • the Compromise of 1850, including the Fugitive Slave Act.
         • the Kansas-Nebraska Act (1854) and subsequent conflict in Kansas.
         • the Dred Scott v. Sandford decision (1857).
         • changes in the party system.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: the death of the Whig party, rise
        of the Republican party, and division of the Democratic party.
        8 – U5.1.5   Describe the resistance of enslaved persons and effects of their actions
        before and during the Civil War.
        Examples may include but are not limited to: Nat Turner, Harriet Tubman and
        the Underground Railroad, Michigan’s role in the Underground Railroad.
        8 – U5.1.6     Describe how major issues debated at the Constitutional Convention,
        such as disagreements over the distribution of political power, rights of individuals
        (liberty and property), rights of states, the election of the executive, and slavery,
        help explain the Civil War.
     U5.2 Civil War
      Evaluate the multiple causes, key events, and complex consequences of the Civil War.
        8 – U5.2.1     Discuss the social, political, economic, and cultural reasons for
        secession.
        8 – U5.2.2   Make an argument to explain the reasons why the North won the Civil
        War by considering the following:
         • critical events and battles in the war.
         • the political and military leadership of the North and South.
         • respective advantages and disadvantages of each side, including geographic,
           demographic, economic, and technological.
        8 – U5.2.3     Examine Abraham Lincoln’s presidency with respect to:
         • his military and political leadership.
         • the evolution of his emancipation policy (including the Emancipation
           Proclamation).
         • The role of his significant writings and speeches, including the Gettysburg
           Address and its relationship to the Declaration of Independence.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                               83
   8 – U5.2.4    Describe the role of African-Americans in the war, including black
   soldiers and regiments, and the increased resistance of enslaved people.
   8 – U5.2.5      Construct generalizations about how the war affected combatants,
   civilians (including the role of women and Indigenous Peoples), the physical
   environment, and the future of warfare, including technological developments.
U5.3 Reconstruction
  Using evidence, develop an argument regarding the character and consequences of
  Reconstruction.
   8 – U5.3.1     Compare the different positions concerning the reconstruction of
   Southern society and the nation, including the positions of President Abraham
   Lincoln, President Andrew Johnson, Republicans, Democrats, and African-Americans.
   8 – U5.3.2     Describe the early responses to the end of the Civil War by describing:
    • the policies of the Freedmen’s Bureau.
    • the restrictions placed on the rights and opportunities of freedmen, including
      racial segregation and Black Codes.
   8 – U5.3.3    Describe the new role of African-Americans in local, state, and federal
   government in the years after the Civil War and the national and regional resistance
   to this change, including the Ku Klux Klan.
   8 – U5.3.4   Analyze the intent and the effect of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and
   Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution.
   8 – U5.3.5    Explain the decision to remove Union troops from the South in 1877
   and investigate its impact on Americans.
U6 USHG ERA 6 – THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN INDUSTRIAL, URBAN, AND
GLOBAL UNITED STATES (1870-1930)
Grade 8 begins to address trends and patterns in the last half of the 19th century,
through 1898.
U6.1 America in the Last Half of the 19th Century
  Analyze the major changes in communication, transportation, demography, and urban
centers, including the location and growth of cities linked by industry and trade, in the
last half of the 19th century. The purpose of this section is to introduce some of the
major changes in American society and the economy in the last part of the 19th century.
This era will be addressed in depth and with greater intellectual sophistication in the high
school U.S. History and Geography content expectations.
84
        8 – U6.1.1 America at Century’s End – compare and contrast the United States in
        1800 with the United States in 1898, focusing on similarities and differences in:
          • territory.
          • population.
          • systems of transportation.
          • governmental policies promoting economic development.
          • economic change.
          • the treatment of African-Americans.
          • the policies toward Indigenous Peoples.
        Examples may include but are not limited to:
        Territory: the size of the United States and land use.
        Population: immigration, reaction to immigrants, the changing demographic
        structure of rural and urban America.
        Systems of transportation: canals, railroads, etc.
        Governmental policies: promoting economic development, tariffs, banking, land
        grants, mineral rights, the Homestead Act.
        Economic change: industrialization, increased global competition, the impact of
        conditions of farmers and industrial workers.
        Policies toward African-Americans: the rise of segregation as endorsed by the
        Supreme Court decision in Plessy v. Ferguson, the response of African-Americans.
        Policies toward Indigenous Peoples: the Dawes Act of 1887, the response of
        Indigenous Peoples.
     U6.2 Investigation Topics and Issue Analysis (P2)
      Use the historical perspective to investigate a significant historical topic from U.S.
     History Eras 3-6 that also has significance as an issue or topic in the United States
     today.
        8 – U6.2.1     U.S. History Investigation Topic and Issue Analysis, Past and Present
        – use historical perspectives to analyze issues in the United States from the
        past and the present; conduct research on a historical issue or topic, identify a
        connection to a contemporary issue, and present findings (e.g., oral, visual, video,
        or electronic presentation, persuasive essay, or research paper); include causes
        and consequences of the historical action and predict possible consequences of the
        contemporary action.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                           85
   Examples of Investigation Topics and Questions (and examples from U.S.
   history): Balance of Power – how has the nation addressed tensions between state
   and federal governmental power? (e.g., Articles of Confederation, U.S. Constitution,
   states’ rights issues, secession, others). Liberty versus Security – how has the
   nation balanced liberty interests with security interests? (e.g., Alien and Sedition
   Acts, suspension of habeas corpus during the Civil War). The Government and Social
   Change – how have governmental policies, the actions of reformers, and economic
   and demographic changes affected social change? (e.g., abolitionist movement,
   women’s movement, Reconstruction policies). Movement of People – how has the
   nation addressed the movement of people into and within the United States? (e.g.,
   Indigenous Peoples, immigrants).
PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CIVIC PARTICIPATION (P3, P4)
P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Issues, Decision Making, Persuasive
Communication About a Public Issue, and Civic Participation
   8 – P3.1.1     Identify, research, analyze, discuss, and defend a position on a
   national public policy issue.
     • identify a national public policy issue.
     • clearly state the issue as a question of public policy orally or in written form.
     • use inquiry methods to trace the origins of the issue and to acquire data about
       the issue.
     • generate and evaluate alternative resolutions to the public issue and analyze
       various perspectives (causes, consequences, positive and negative impact) on
       the issue.
     • identify and apply Democratic Values or Constitutional Principles.
     • share and discuss findings of research and issue analysis in group discussions
       and debates.
     • compose a persuasive essay justifying the position with a reasoned argument.
     • develop an action plan to address or inform others about the issue.
P4.2 Civic Participation
  Act constructively to further the public good.
   8 – P4.2.1    Demonstrate knowledge of how, when, and where individuals would
   plan and conduct activities intended to advance views in matters of public policy,
   report the results, and evaluate effectiveness.
   8 – P4.2.2     Engage in activities intended to contribute to solving a national or
   international problem studied.
   8 – P4.2.3     Participate in projects to help or inform others.
86

                                 THE ARC OF INQUIRY: GRADES 9-12

     Dimension 1: Central to a rich social studies experience is the capability for developing questions that can frame
     and advance an inquiry. Those questions come in two forms: compelling and supporting questions.

     Individually and collaboratively, students construct compelling questions and:
           • explain how a question reflects an enduring issue in the field.
           • explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about interpretations and applications of
               disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question.
           • explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about interpretations and applications of
               disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a supporting question.
           • explain how supporting questions contribute to an inquiry and how, through engaging source work, new
               compelling and supporting questions emerge.

     Dimension 2: The four disciplines within social studies provide the intellectual context for studying how
     humans have interacted with each other and with the environment over time. Each of these disciplines — civics,
     economics, geography, and history — offers a unique way of thinking and organizing knowledge as well as
     systems for verifying knowledge. Dimension 2 focuses on the disciplinary concepts and tools students need to
     understand and apply as they study the specific content described in Michigan’s state standards.

     Dimension 3: Dimension 3 includes the skills students need to analyze information and come to conclusions in
     an inquiry. These skills focus on gathering and evaluating sources, and then developing claims and using evidence
     to support these claims.

     Individually and collaboratively, students:
           • gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views while using the
               origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection.
           • evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source.
           • identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect
               inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims.
           • refine claims and counterclaims, attending to precision, significance, and knowledge conveyed through the
               claim while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.

     Dimension 4: Students should construct and communicate claims for a variety of purposes and audiences.
     These audiences may range from the school classroom to the larger public community.

     Individually and collaboratively, students:
           • construct arguments using precise and knowledgeable claims, with evidence from multiple sources, while
               acknowledging counterclaims and evidentiary weaknesses.
           • construct explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or non-linear), examples, and
               details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and
               weaknesses of the explanation given its purpose (e.g., cause and effect, chronological, procedural,
               technical).
           • present adaptations of arguments and explanations that feature evocative ideas and perspectives on
               issues and topics to reach a range of audiences and venues outside the classroom using print and
               oral technologies (e.g., posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, reports, and maps) and digital
               technologies (e.g., Internet, social media, and digital documentary).
           • critique the use of claims and evidence in arguments for credibility.
           • critique the use of the reasoning, sequencing, and supporting details of explanations.
           • use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of local, regional,
               and global problems; instances of such problems in multiple contexts; and challenges and opportunities
               faced by those trying to address these problems over time and place.
           • assess options for individual and collective action to address local, regional, and global problems by
               engaging in self-reflection, strategy identification, and complex causal reasoning.
           • apply a range of deliberative and democratic strategies and procedures to make decisions and take action
               in their classrooms, schools, and out-of-school civic contexts.



 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                 		                    MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                            87

  SOCIAL STUDIES PROCESS AND SKILLS STANDARDS: HIGH SCHOOL

P1 READING AND COMMUNICATION – READ AND COMMUNICATE EFFECTIVELY
P1.1 Use appropriate strategies to read and analyze social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and
texts.
P1.2 Interpret primary and secondary source documents for point of view, context, bias, and frame of
reference or perspective.
P1.3 Explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about the interpretation of sources
and the application of disciplinary concepts.
P1.4 Express social science ideas clearly in written, spoken, and graphic forms.
P1.5 Construct and present an argument supported with evidence.

P2 INQUIRY, RESEARCH, AND ANALYSIS
P2.1 Apply methods of inquiry, including asking and answering compelling and supporting questions, to
investigate social science problems.
P2.2 Evaluate data presented in social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and texts for credibility,
considering the origin, authority, structure, and context of the information.
P2.3 Know how to find, organize, evaluate, and interpret information from a variety of credible
sources.
P2.4 Use relevant information from multiple credible sources representing a wide range of views
considering the origin, authority, structure, and context to answer a compelling or supporting question.

P3 PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND DECISION MAKING
P3.1 Clearly state an issue as a question of public policy, gather and interpret information about that
issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
P3.2 Discuss public policy issues, by clarifying position, considering opposing views, and applying
Democratic Values or Constitutional Principles to develop and refine claims.
P3.3 Construct claims and refine counter-claims that express and justify decisions on public policy
issues.
P3.4 Critique the use of reasoning, sequence, and supporting details in creating a claim and the
subsequent evidence used to support a claim for credibility.

P4 CIVIC PARTICIPATION
P4.1 Act within the rule of law and hold others to the same standard.
P4.2 Assess options for individual and collective action to advance views on matters of public policy
and to address local, regional, or global problems.
P4.3 Plan, conduct, and evaluate the effectiveness of activities intended to advance views on matters
of public policy and to address local, regional, or global problems.
88

                MICHIGAN’S GRADE LEVEL CONTENT EXPECTATIONS FOR
                             SOCIAL STUDIES (9-12)

                                          High School Social Studies Overview Chart
            World History                   U.S.History and                       Civics                       Economics
           and Geography                      Geography

        Course/Credit Focus               Course/Credit Focus             Course/Credit Focus            Course/Credit Focus

     F1 World Historical and          Historical and Geographical    Civics Knowledge                Economics Knowledge
     Geographical Inquiry and         Knowledge and Perspective
                                                                     Intellectual Skills             Intellectual Skills
     Literacy Practices
                                      Historical and Geographical
                                                                     Participatory Skills            Economic Literacy
     Global Analysis of World         Analysis and Interpretation
     History Eras 4-7 from Two                                       Civics Dispositions             E1 The Market Economy
                                      Thematic Analysis of U.S.
     Perspectives: Global and                                        C1    Philosophical
                                      History Eras 6-9                                               E2 The National Economy
     Interregional                                                         Foundations of
                                      F   Foundations                                                E3 International Economy
     W4 WHG - Era 4                                                        Civic Society and
                                          USHG ERAS 1-5
                                                                           Government
         Expanding and
                                      U6 USHG - Era 6
         Intensified Hemispheric                                     C2    Origins and Foundations
         Interactions, 300-1500           The Development of an            of Civic Society and
         CE                               Industrial, Urban, and           Government
                                          Global United States,
     W5 WHG - Era 5                                                  C3    Structure and Function
                                          1870-1930
                                                                           of Governments in the
         The Emergence of the
                                      U7 USHG - Era 7                      United States
         First Global Age,
         15th-18th Centuries              The Great Depression       C4    Rights and Liberties in
                                          and World War II,                the United States of
     W6 WHG - Era 6
                                          1920-1945                        America
         An Age of Global
                                      U8 USHG - Era 8                C5    The United States of
         Revolutions,
                                                                           America and World
         18th Century-1914                Post-World War II United
                                                                           Affairs
                                          States,
     W7 WHG - Era 7
                                          1945-1989                  C6    Citizenship and Civic
         Global Crisis and                                                 Participation in the
                                      U9 USHG - Era 9
         Achievement,                                                      United States of
         1900-Present                     America in a New                 America
                                          Global Age,
     Global Issues
                                          1980-Present




                     Sample World History and Geography Compelling and Supporting Question
     HSWHG                Have        1) What were the social, political, economic, and cultural motives for imperialism
                       increased      in the 19th century?
                     migration and    2) Why were European powers able to spread imperialism through Africa, the
                     cross-cultural   Middle East, and Asia so quickly?
                      interactions
                         made         3) How did native people respond to and/or resist imperialism?
                     humans more      4) What were long-term social, political, economic, and cultural consequences of
                      connected?      imperialism?


                                      Standards Connection: 5.1.1, 5.1.2, 5.2.1, 5.2.2, 5.2.3, 6.2.1, 6.2.4




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                     		                       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                               89

                            WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY
The World in Time and Space: Michigan’s Content Expectations
Michigan’s World History and Geography content expectations encourage students to work with and across
different scales of time and space to:
•   investigate global patterns and developments over time while connecting more local patterns to larger
    interregional and global patterns.
•   employ different analytical schemes, including global, regional, national and local, to understand
    developments over time.
•   make comparisons within and among regions and societies, and across time.
•   develop an understanding of the historical and geographic context of human commonalities and
    differences, particularly in considering claims of universal standards or of cultural diversity.
In their studies, students will focus on five large historical and geographic patterns:
•   the causes, consequences, and patterns of changes in human governance systems and changes over
    time.
•   the causes, consequences, and patterns of interactions among societies and regions, including trade,
    war, diplomacy, and international institutions.
•   the impact of demographic, technological, environmental, and economic changes on people, their
    cultures, and their environments.
•   the causes, consequences, and patterns of cultural, intellectual, religious and social changes.
•   the relationship between the environment and developments in population, settlement, economy, and
    politics.
Using time, the K-12 expectations are presented in seven overlapping historical eras. Era 4 content in
the high school expectations provides important context for the First Global Age in Era 5 (as well as
subsequent eras), and builds upon Era 4 content that students are assumed to have learned in 7th grade
(see page 70). The high school expectations include Eras 4-7 and conclude with a set of contemporary
global issues. A contextualized review of major ideas from Eras 1-4 studied in 7th grade may be helpful.
       Era 4: Expanding and Intensified Hemispheric Interactions, 300 to 1500 CE
       Era 5: The Emergence of the First Global Age, 15th to 18th Centuries
       Era 6: An Age of Global Revolutions, 18th Century to 1914
       Era 7: Global Crisis and Achievement, 1900 to Present Day
       Contemporary Global Issues

Global or cross-temporal expectations focus on large-scale patterns occurring in several areas of the
globe, such as the collapse or decline of empires, growth of trade networks, war, industrialism, and the
diffusion of religions or philosophies. Expectations at this level also include comparisons that span across
time (or eras), such as comparing the growth of world religions before 1500 CE with growth after 1500 or
comparing the agricultural economic system of the 17th century with the industrial economic system of
the 18th century.
Interregional or comparative expectations offer students an opportunity to investigate significant
developments, processes, and patterns in and across particular regions of the globe, and connect
developments there to global developments during the same era. These expectations also include cross-
spatial comparisons, such as comparing the social and economic impacts of industrialism in particular
regions of the world and comparing 20th century independence movements in India, Africa, and Southeast
Asia.
Although the expectations are divided into eras and spatial scales for the purpose of organization,
teachers and students need not see fixed lines between eras and spatial scales. These are not absolute
compartments but rather fluid, nested categories used to help organize content expectations. For
example, teachers and students should be able to move from a global look at trade networks in the 10th
century, through an interregional look, to a look at the impact of trade in regions such as South Africa,
Japan, or Cuba. The connections between and among these temporal eras and spatial scales are the most
important features of world history and geography.
90
     USING THE WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY HSCE: THINGS TO REMEMBER
     Several considerations are important as teachers use the High School Content Expectations to plan instruction.
     • The High School Content Expectations are the foundation for developing historical, geographic, civic, and
        economic thinking.
     • Active social studies inquiry is essential. The Arc of Inquiry is a description of the process that helps
        students develop the kind of reasoned and informed decision making needed for active citizenship in
        American society.
     • Beyond the high school courses needed to develop state assessments, the HSCE does not specify lessons,
        units, or an instructional sequence. World geography can be taught regionally or thematically, and history
        can be taught past to present, or present to past.
     • On numerous occasions, the expectations will include examples to help clarify teachable content. These
        specific examples are suggestions. Educators may use other examples to meet the expectations or to guide
        instruction and the creation of local curriculum and resources. The examples are not required content but
        may appear in a prompt of an assessment question; however, the focus of a state summative assessment
        question will be the language and content of the expectation itself.
     Process and Skills
     The Social Studies Process and Skills for High School are repeated in each of the Course/Credit standards.



     WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY (WHG) CONTENT STATEMENT OUTLINE
     SOCIAL STUDIES PROCESS AND SKILLS STANDARDS
            P1      Reading and Communication
            P2      Inquiry, Research, and Analysis
            P3      Public Discourse and Decision Making
            P4      Civic Participation

     WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY
     Eras 4-7 Addressed in WHG HSCE. NOTE: Some content from Era 4 is represented in the 7th grade expectations.
     Teachers may wish to review the 7th grade content as well.

     F1     World Historical and Geographical Inquiry and Literacy Practices

     WHG Era 4 – Expanding and Intensified Hemispheric Interactions, 300-1500 CE
            4.1     Growth and Interactions of World Religions, and Intensifying Trade Networks and Contacts

            4.2     Growth of Islam and Dar al-Islam, Unification of Eurasia under the Mongols, and Spheres of
                    Interaction and Influence in the Americas

     WHG Era 5 – The Emergence of the First Global Age, 15th to 18th Centuries
            5.1     Emerging Global System and Diffusion of World Religions
            5.2     Cultural Encounters and the Columbian Exchange, the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade, and Afro-
                    Eurasian Empires

     WHG Era 6 – An Age of Global Revolutions, 18th Century-1914
            6.1     Global Revolutions, Worldwide Migrations and Population Changes, and Increasing Global
                    Interconnections
            6.2     Comparing Political Revolutions and/or Independence Movements, Growth of Nationalism and
                    Nation-States, Industrialization, and Imperialism
     WHG Era 7 – Global Crisis and Achievement, 1900-PRESENT DAY
            7.1     Power and Resistance, Global Conflict, Genocide in the 20th Century, and Technological,
                    Scientific, and Cultural Exchanges
            7.2     World War I, Interwar Period, World War II, Cold War Conflicts, Revolution, Decolonization, and
                    Democratization, and Case Studies of Genocide

     Contemporary Global Issues 1-4 (Population, Resources, Patterns of Global Interactions, Conflict,
     Cooperation, and Security)



 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		               		                    MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                            91

                           WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY

FOUNDATIONS OF HIGH SCHOOL WORLD HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY
How do world historians make sense of a global past? Why are geography and spatial
reasoning important for understanding world history? These foundational expectations
help students answer such questions, and introduce them to the tools they will need to
study world history. Individually and collaboratively, students can engage in planned in-
quiries.
F1    World Historical and Geographical Inquiry and Literacy Practices
 Explain and use disciplinary processes and tools from world history. These processes
and tools include but are not limited to:
     • framing questions to guide inquiry.
     • determining historical significance.
     • applying concepts of change over time, continuity, and multiple causes and con-
       sequences.
     • contextualizing evidence and historical phenomena under study.
     • explaining and applying different periodization schemes.
     • using and connecting different spatial frames (examples may include but are not
       limited to global, interregional, regional).
     • recognizing that perspectives are shaped by different experiences across time
       and space.
     • sourcing, analyzing, and corroborating multiple sources of evidence (examples
       may include but are not limited to primary and secondary; verbal and visual; in
       print, three-dimensional, and digital).
     • analyzing maps and graphs to understand large-scale movement, trends, and
       patterns.
     • using spatial reasoning to evaluate the role of human-environment interactions
       in history.
     • comparing and contrasting physical, political, economic, and cultural characteris-
       tics across time and space.
92
     WHG ERA 4: EXPANDING AND INTENSIFIED HEMISPHERIC INTERACTIONS, 300
     TO 1500 CE
     How do religion and philosophy shape the development of societies? How does trade af-
     fect culture? Prior to the great global convergence, how did the worldviews of people in
     Afro-Eurasia compare with the worldviews of people in the Americas? These Era 4 expec-
     tations help students answer such questions, and provide a context for the emergence
     of the first global age in Era 5. Individually and collaboratively, students can use maps,
     graphs, primary sources, and other documents in planned inquiries.
     4.1     Global or Cross-Temporal Expectations
      Analyze important hemispheric interactions and temporal developments during an era
     of increasing regional power, religious expansion, and the collapse of some powerful em-
     pires.
           4.1.1   Growth and Interactions of World Religions – analyze the significance of the
           growth of and interactions between world religions.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: increasing trade between Islam
           and Christianity; the Crusades; tensions between Catholic and Orthodox Christianity;
           conflict and cooperation between Muslims, Christians, and Jews in medieval Spain;
           the influence of Islam and Christianity on African culture; influences of Islam and
           Hinduism in South Asia.
           4.1.2   Intensifying Trade Networks and Contacts – compare and contrast the devel-
           opment, interdependence, specialization, and importance of interregional land-based
           and sea-based trading systems both within and between societies.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: trans-Saharan trading in gold
           and salt; intensification of trade around the Indian Ocean; increasing trade and the
           growth of towns and cities in western Europe; the spread of the plague and sig-
           nificance of its consequences; networks of exchange in North, Central, and South
           America.
     4.2     Interregional or Comparative Expectations
      Analyze and compare important hemispheric interactions and cross-regional develop-
     ments, including the growth and consequences of an interregional system of communi-
     cation, trade, and culture exchange during an era of increasing regional power and reli-
     gious expansion.
           4.2.1   Growth of Islam and Dar al-Islam (a country, territory, land, or abode where
           Muslim sovereignty prevails) – explain the significance of Islam in an interconnected
           Afro-Eurasia.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating geographic extent
           of Muslim empires; the artistic, scientific, technological, and economic features that
           developed in Muslim society through cultural interactions and exchanges; diverse re-
           ligious traditions of Islam; the cultural, political, and economic influence of Dar al-Is-
           lam in Afro-Eurasia; the caliphate as both a religious and political institution.



 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		        		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                  93
      4.2.2    Unification of Eurasia under the Mongols – analyze the significance of Mongol
      rule in Afro-Eurasia and the impact of the Mongol Empire’s disintegration.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating geographic patterns
      of Mongol conquest and expansion; characteristics and consequences of the Pax
      Mongolica; revival of long-distance trading networks between China and the Mediter-
      ranean world.
      4.2.3   Spheres of Interaction and Influence in the Americas – compare and contrast
      the diverse characteristics and interactions of peoples in the Americas.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: case studies of the Maya, Aztec,
      Inca, Pueblo, and/or Eastern Woodland; the role of the environment in shaping dif-
      ferent societies; goods exchanged between societies; shifting power and influence of
      groups in each region.
WHG ERA 5 – THE EMERGENCE OF THE FIRST GLOBAL AGE, 15TH TO 18TH
CENTURIES
What happens when separate “worlds” converge? Did the world become a better place
to live because of the global convergence? Why did some societies emerge with more
power, and others with less? In Era 5, students can investigate questions such as these
through both global and interregional lenses. Individually and collaboratively, students
can use maps, graphs, primary sources, and other documents in planned inquiries.
5.1      Global or Cross-Temporal Expectations
 Analyze the global impact of and significant developments caused by transoceanic trav-
el and the linking of all the major areas of the world by the 18th century.
      5.1.1   Emerging Global System – differentiate between the global systems of trade,
      migration, and political power from those in the previous era.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating the influence of
      mercantilism and capitalism; the role of sugar and silver in the global economy;
      movement of people, commodities, and ideas across the Atlantic basin; rising nation-
      alism, militarism, and absolutism; emergence of European maritime power in Asia
      and land control in the Americas.
      5.1.2    Diffusion of World Religions – evaluate the impact of the diffusion of world
      religions and belief systems on social, political, cultural, and economic systems.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating the expulsion of Mus-
      lims and Jews from Spain; Reformation and expansion of Christianity to the Ameri-
      cas; expansion of Islam to Southeast Asia; Sikhism’s contribution to the Punjab area
      of South Asia; Buddhism’s growth in East and Southeast Asia; Taoist and Confucian
      political influences; cases of religious syncretism (blending of beliefs and traditions);
      continuity of local, indigenous beliefs throughout the world.
5.2     Interregional or Comparative Expectations
  Evaluate the impact of the global convergence on interregional developments and in-
teractions in various contexts.
94
           5.2.1  Cultural Encounters and the Columbian Exchange – explain the demographic,
           environmental, and political consequences of European oceanic travel and conquest.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating the near-elimination
           of indigenous civilizations and peoples in the Americas; diet and population changes
           in Africa, Asia, and Europe; social stratification of peninsulares, creoles, mestizos,
           slaves, and Indigenous Peoples; ecological impact of exchanges of flora and fauna
           across the Atlantic.
           5.2.2    The Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade – analyze the causes and development of the
           Atlantic trade system with respect to the capture and sale of Africans, the creation
           of the gun-slave cycle, the Middle Passage, and forced migration of Africans to the
           Americas, the establishment of the plantation complex, and the rise of slave resis-
           tance in the New World.
           5.2.3    Afro-Eurasian Empires – compare and contrast the different ways govern-
           ments expanded or centralized control across various parts of Afro-Eurasia, and ana-
           lyze the consequences of these changes.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: case studies of political, econom-
           ic, and cultural transformations in the Ottoman, Mughal, Safavid, Songhai, and Rus-
           sian Empires, Ming and Qing Dynasties, and/or Tokugawa Shogunate.
     WHG ERA 6 – AN AGE OF GLOBAL REVOLUTIONS, 18TH CENTURY-1914
     What constitutes a “revolution?” What makes people want to change their government?
     How do political and economic forces shape people’s identities? In Era 6, students can
     investigate questions such as these through both global and interregional lenses. Indi-
     vidually and collaboratively, students can use maps, graphs, primary sources, and other
     documents in planned inquiries.
     6.1     Global or Cross-Temporal Expectations
       Evaluate the causes, characteristics, and consequences of revolutions of the intellectu-
     al, political, and economic structures in an era of increasing global trade and consolida-
     tions of power.
           6.1.1    Global Revolutions – explain the characteristics, extent, and impact of the
           global revolutions, including but not limited to changes in economic and political sys-
           tems, and shifts in relative political and military power.
           6.1.2    Worldwide Migrations and Population Changes – analyze the causes and con-
           sequences of shifts in world population and major patterns of long-distance migra-
           tions, including the impact of industrialism, imperialism, changing diets, and scientif-
           ic advances.
           6.1.3   Increasing Global Interconnections – describe the increasing global intercon-
           nections and new global networks that resulted in the spread of major innovations in
           governance, economic systems, cultural traits, technologies, and commodities.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating constitutionalism,
           communism and socialism, republicanism, nationalism, capitalism, human rights, and
           secularization.

 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		       		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                95
6.2     Interregional or Comparative Expectations
 Analyze and compare the interregional patterns of nationalism, state building, social
and economic reform, and imperialism.
      6.2.1    Comparing Political Revolutions and/or Independence Movements – compare
      and contrast the American Revolution, the French Revolution, and one other revolu-
      tion or independence movement that occurred in a region external to Europe from
      the standpoint of political, economic, and social causes and consequences.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: case studies of Chinese, Haitian,
      Mexican and/or other Latin American revolutions; others who fought for a new po-
      litical order against oppression, like Tacky’s War in Jamaica in 1760, the rebellion of
      Tupac Amaru in 1780, or the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
      6.2.2   Growth of Nationalism and Nation-States – compare and contrast the rise of
      nation-states in a western and non-western context.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: case studies of Germany, Italy,
      Japan.
      6.2.3    Industrialization – compare and contrast the causes and consequences of
      industrialization around the world, including social, economic, and environmental im-
      pacts.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: case studies of industrialization
      in Great Britain, Belgium, France, Germany, France, Russia, and/or Japan; effects on
      women and children; the rise of organized labor movements; the extent and conse-
      quences of urbanization.
      6.2.4  Imperialism – analyze the political, economic, and social causes and conse-
      quences of imperialism in different regions.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: case studies of Japan (Meiji Res-
      toration), Qing China, India, Egypt, Ethiopia and/or the Congo; encounters between
      imperial powers (Europe, Japan) and local people in India, Africa, Central Asia, and
      East Asia; the connection between imperialism and racism, including the social con-
      struction of race.
96
     WHG ERA 7 – GLOBAL CRISIS AND ACHIEVEMENT, 1900-Present
     Why was the 20th century so violent? Did an accelerating pace of technological and sci-
     entific innovations improve people’s lives? How does increasing global interaction affect
     individuals? In Era 7, students can investigate questions such as these through both
     global and interregional lenses. Individually and collaboratively, students can use maps,
     graphs, primary sources, and other documents in planned inquiries.
     7.1     Global or Cross-Temporal Expectations
       Analyze the impact of changes in global balances of military, political, economic, and
     technological power throughout the 20th century and to the present.
           7.1.1    Power and Resistance – describe the global reconfigurations and restructur-
           ing of political and economic relationships throughout the 20th century and to the
           present, including state-organized efforts to expand power and the role of resistance
           movements against such efforts.
           7.1.2   Global Conflict – compare and contrast the nature, extent, and impact of
           modern warfare with warfare in the previous eras, including the roles of ideology,
           technology, and civilians.
           7.1.3   Genocide in the 20th Century – differentiate genocide from other atrocities
           and forms of mass killing and explain its extent, causes, and consequences in the
           20th century and to the present.
           7.1.4   Technological, Scientific, and Cultural Exchanges – describe significant tech-
           nological innovations and scientific breakthroughs in transportation, communication,
           medicine, and warfare and analyze how they both benefited and imperiled humanity.
     7.2     Interregional or Comparative Expectations
       Assess the interregional causes and consequences of the global wars, revolutions, and
     independence movements during this era.
           7.2.1  World War I – explain the causes, characteristics, and long-term conse-
           quences of World War I, including the major decisions of the Versailles Treaty.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating effects of national-
           ism, industrialization, disputes over territory, systems of alliances, imperialism, the
           role of colonial peoples and militarism, total war ideology and the Armenian Geno-
           cide; distinctive characteristics and impacts of the war on the soldiers and people
           at home, including the use of propaganda; consequences of the mandate system,
           reparations, and national self-determination around the globe.
           7.2.2   Interwar Period – analyze the transformations that shaped world societies
           between World War I and World War II, including the economic depression, and the
           spread of fascism, communism, and nationalism in different world regions.
           Examples may include but are not limited to: case studies of the economic de-
           pression on different regions, nations, and the globe; case studies of the rise of fas-
           cism and the spread of communism in Europe and Asia; comparing and contrasting
           the rise of nationalism in China, Turkey, and India.


 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		        		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                           97
7.2.3   World War II – analyze the causes, course, characteristics, and consequenc-
es of World War II, including the emergence the United States and Soviet Union as
global superpowers.
Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating the role of aggres-
sion and conflict appeasement that led to war in Europe and Asia; the development
and enactment of Hitler’s “Final Solution” policy and the Holocaust, major turning
points and unique characteristics of the war; spatial and political impact of the Allied
negotiations on the nations of Eastern Europe and throughout the world; immedi-
ate consequences of the war’s end, including the devastation, effects on population,
dawn of the atomic age, and the occupation of Germany and Japan.
7.2.4  Cold War Conflicts – analyze the causes and consequences of major Cold
War conflicts, including the global reconfigurations and restructuring of political and
economic relationships in the post-World War II era.
Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating economic, political,
and military origins of the Cold War; arms race and space race; comparing and con-
trasting conflicts in Asia, Africa, and Central America; the significance of the Cold
War as a 20th century event, including transitions from bipolar to multipolar cen-
ter(s) of power.
7.2.5  Revolution, Decolonization, and Democratization – evaluate the causes and
consequences of revolutionary and independence movements in different world re-
gions.
Examples may include but are not limited to: case studies of the Russian Revo-
lution, Mexican Revolution, and/or Iranian Revolution; legacy of imperialism in Africa,
Southeast Asia, and Latin America; importance of the massive resistance and non-vi-
olent philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi; independence movements and formation of
new nations in the Indian Subcontinent, Africa, Eastern Europe, and Southeast Asia;
the development of the State of Israel; conflicts such as Arab-Israeli disputes, Pales-
tine, the Suez Crisis, and Sunni-Shi’a conflicts.
7.2.6   Case Studies of Genocide – analyze the development, enactment, and con-
sequences of, as well as the international community’s responses to, the Holocaust
(or Shoah), Armenian Genocide, and at least one other genocide.
Examples may include but are not limited to: investigating the ideology and
policies that led to genocide; policies to address and prevent genocide; cases stud-
ies of genocides such as Herero and Namaqua, Cambodia, Rwanda, Ukraine, and/or
Bosnia.
98
     CG CONTEMPORARY GLOBAL ISSUES
     How have world historical events, patterns, and forces shaped contemporary global is-
     sues? To what extent are contemporary global issues a continuation of world historical
     trends? Students can investigate questions such as these, and/or pose their own ques-
     tions about contemporary global issues, focusing on themes like population, resources,
     global interactions, and conflict, cooperation and security. Individually and collaborative-
     ly, students can use maps, graphs, primary sources, and other documents in planned
     inquiries.
     CG1 Population
       Explain the causes and consequences of contemporary population changes by analyz-
     ing the:
         • population change (including birth rate, death rate, life expectancy, growth rate,
           doubling time, aging population, changes in science and technology).
         • distributions of population (including relative changes in urban-rural populations,
           gender, age, patterns of migration, and population density).
         • relationship of the population changes to global interactions, and their impact on
           different regions of the world.
     CG2 Resources
       Explain changes in the use, distribution, and importance of natural resources (including
     land, water, energy, food; and renewable, non-renewable, and flow resources) on human
     life, settlement, and interactions by describing and evaluating:
         • changes in spatial distribution and use of natural resources.
         • the differences in ways societies have been using and distributing natural re-
           sources.
         • social, political, economic, and environmental consequences of the development,
           distribution, and use of natural resources.
         • major changes in networks for the production, distribution, and consumption of
           natural resources, including the growth of multinational corporations and govern-
           mental and non-governmental organizations.
         • the impact of humans on the global environment.




 Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                99
CG3 Patterns of Global Interactions
 Define the process of globalization and evaluate the merit of this concept to describe
the contemporary world by analyzing:
    • economic interdependence of the world’s countries, world trade patterns, and
      the impact on those who labor, including voluntary and forced migration such as
      human trafficking.
    • the exchanges of scientific, technological, and medical innovations.
    • cultural diffusion and the different ways cultures/societies respond to “new” cul-
      tural ideas.
    • the comparative economic advantages and disadvantages of regions, regarding
      cost of labor, natural resources, location, and tradition.
    • distribution of wealth and resources and efforts to narrow the inequitable distri-
      bution of resources.
CG4 Conflict, Cooperation, and Security
 Analyze the causes and challenges of continuing and new conflicts by describing:
    • tensions resulting from ethnic, territorial, religious, and/or nationalist differences.
    • causes of and responses to ethnic cleansing/genocide/mass killing.
    • local and global attempts at peacekeeping, security, democratization, and admin-
      istration of international justice and human rights.
    • the types of warfare used in these conflicts, including terrorism, private militias,
      and new technologies.
100


                                  THE ARC OF INQUIRY: GRADES 9-12

      Dimension 1: Central to a rich social studies experience is the capability for developing questions that can frame
      and advance an inquiry. Those questions come in two forms: compelling and supporting questions.

      Individually and collaboratively, students construct compelling questions and:
            • explain how a question reflects an enduring issue in the field.
            • explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about interpretations and applications of
                disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question.
            • explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about interpretations and applications of
                disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a supporting question.
            • explain how supporting questions contribute to an inquiry and how, through engaging source work, new
                compelling and supporting questions emerge.

      Dimension 2: The four disciplines within social studies provide the intellectual context for studying how
      humans have interacted with each other and with the environment over time. Each of these disciplines — civics,
      economics, geography, and history — offers a unique way of thinking and organizing knowledge as well as
      systems for verifying knowledge. Dimension 2 focuses on the disciplinary concepts and tools students need to
      understand and apply as they study the specific content described in Michigan’s state standards.

      Dimension 3: Dimension 3 includes the skills students need to analyze information and come to conclusions in
      an inquiry. These skills focus on gathering and evaluating sources, and then developing claims and using evidence
      to support these claims.

      Individually and collaboratively, students:
            • gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views while using the
                origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection.
            • evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source.
            • identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect
                inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims.
            • refine claims and counterclaims, attending to precision, significance, and knowledge conveyed through the
                claim while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.

      Dimension 4: Students should construct and communicate claims for a variety of purposes and audiences.
      These audiences may range from the school classroom to the larger public community.

      Individually and collaboratively, students:
            • construct arguments using precise and knowledgeable claims, with evidence from multiple sources, while
                acknowledging counterclaims and evidentiary weaknesses.
            • construct explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or non-linear), examples, and
                details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and
                weaknesses of the explanation given its purpose (e.g., cause and effect, chronological, procedural,
                technical).
            • present adaptations of arguments and explanations that feature evocative ideas and perspectives on
                issues and topics to reach a range of audiences and venues outside the classroom using print and
                oral technologies (e.g., posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, reports, and maps) and digital
                technologies (e.g., Internet, social media, and digital documentary).
            • critique the use of claims and evidence in arguments for credibility.
            • critique the use of the reasoning, sequencing, and supporting details of explanations.
            • use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of local, regional,
                and global problems; instances of such problems in multiple contexts; and challenges and opportunities
                faced by those trying to address these problems over time and place.
            • assess options for individual and collective action to address local, regional, and global problems by
                engaging in self-reflection, strategy identification, and complex causal reasoning.
            • apply a range of deliberative and democratic strategies and procedures to make decisions and take action
                in their classrooms, schools, and out-of-school civic contexts.



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                 		                    MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                            101

  SOCIAL STUDIES PROCESS AND SKILLS STANDARDS: HIGH SCHOOL

P1 READING AND COMMUNICATION – READ AND COMMUNICATE EFFECTIVELY
P1.1 Use appropriate strategies to read and analyze social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and
texts.
P1.2 Interpret primary and secondary source documents for point of view, context, bias, and frame of
reference or perspective.
P1.3 Explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about the interpretation of sources
and the application of disciplinary concepts.
P1.4 Express social science ideas clearly in written, spoken, and graphic forms.
P1.5 Construct and present an argument supported with evidence.

P2 INQUIRY, RESEARCH, AND ANALYSIS
P2.1 Apply methods of inquiry, including asking and answering compelling and supporting questions, to
investigate social science problems.
P2.2 Evaluate data presented in social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and texts for credibility,
considering the origin, authority, structure, and context of the information.
P2.3 Know how to find, organize, evaluate, and interpret information from a variety of credible
sources.
P2.4 Use relevant information from multiple credible sources representing a wide range of views,
considering the origin, authority, structure, and context, to answer a compelling or supporting
question.

P3 PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND DECISION MAKING
P3.1 Clearly state an issue as a question of public policy, gather and interpret information about that
issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
P3.2 Discuss public policy issues, by clarifying positions, considering opposing views, and applying
Democratic Values or Constitutional Principles to develop and refine claims.
P3.3 Construct claims and refine counter-claims expressing and justifying decisions on public policy
issues.
P3.4 Critique the use of reasoning, sequence, and supporting details in creating a claim and the
subsequent evidence used to support a claim for credibility.

P4 CIVIC PARTICIPATION
P4.1 Act within the rule of law and hold others to the same standard.
P4.2 Assess options for individual and collective action to advance views on matters of public policy
and address local, regional, or global problems.
P4.3 Plan, conduct, and evaluate the effectiveness of activities intended to advance views on matters
of public policy and to address local, regional, or global problems.
102

                          UNITED STATES HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY

      The disciplined study of history and geography is vital and essential for citizens in a democratic society
      such as the United States. History and geography help us understand the origins, development,
      growth, and challenges of our institutions and our culture. These disciplines help to locate ourselves
      in both time and space and thus help us think about who we are and about our possible futures. The
      study of history and geography of the United States prepares us to take up the challenges of life in
      contemporary society, by helping us see the common and diverse strands that formed and continue to
      shape our present life while developing the habits of mind essential for democratic citizenship.
      Since the content expectations use both geography and history, it is vital that Michigan teachers
      understand the major features of geography and history to understand the design of these
      expectations.

      HISTORY: AN INTEGRATIVE, DISCIPLINED STUDY
      History is an integrative discipline that studies change over time in people, places, and environments.
      The content of history consists of human beings and how, at different times and in different places,
      people and their cultures and societies have changed and developed. Historians study the past to
      understand the present, drawing upon a vast storehouse of information about human behavior,
      relationships between people and environments, and the ways that people have developed solutions
      to meet their perceived problems. History is important for students in the 21st century, because of the
      role the past plays in shaping the present. As a philosopher once remarked, “We live our lives forward,
      but we understand them backward.”
      Like geography, the study of history also seeks to foster citizens who actively and systematically
      investigate the world and its relationships. The disciplined study of history requires students to
      develop important questions, conduct inquiry, and evaluate and develop historical arguments. Like
      all disciplines, historical study begins with problems, questions, and curiosities. Historians wonder
      about how things came to be the way they are, or how interpretations of the past influence action in
      the present. History, however, requires the ability to engage in investigations using different types of
      evidence and data, including those generated by other disciplines such as economics and geography.
      The study of history requires students to analyze and use a wide range of sources — such as public
      and private documents, numerical data, and maps — to develop the most accurate picture of the past
      possible. Studying history also requires students to analyze and evaluate conflicting interpretations and
      assess past examples of change over time. The study of history thus provides frequent opportunities to
      engage in reasoned debate, to assess the merits of competing claims about the present and the past,
      and to consider the world from different perspectives. It helps students understand the complexity
      involved in most changes while attending to the continuities often obscured by dramatic change.
      Students studying history also learn to make reasoned arguments, supported by facts and evidence,
      and informed by competing perspectives.
      History thus not only helps us use facts to understand the context and background of our institutions,
      cultures and societies; it also helps increase our ability to analyze change, evaluate others’
      interpretations, and develop and improve our own. It draws on a wide range of information and
      approaches to investigate the dynamic historical processes and interpretations that shape the world in
      which we live.

      GEOGRAPHY: AN INTEGRATIVE, DISCIPLINED STUDY
      Geography is an integrative discipline that brings together the physical and human dimensions of
      the world in the study of people, places, and environments. The content of geography is Earth’s
      surface and the processes that result in natural environments, the relationships between people
      and environments, and the ways that people use and view places both near and far. Geography is
      important because the world facing students in the 21st century is more crowded, the maintenance of
      a sustainable physical environment is more challenging, and the global economy is more competitive
      and interconnected. Comprehending issues and making decisions about local places, regions, the
      world, and the diverse environments and the economies requires competencies with geography from
      the local to global scale.



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		            		                 MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                               103
The purpose of studying geography is to foster the development of citizens who will actively seek and
systematically use a spatial perspective in viewing the world. The spatial perspective is the ability to
view the patterns and dynamic processes on Earth. These patterns and processes occur as webs of
relationships within and between the natural world and the activities of human societies. A spatial
perspective enables an individual to visualize, comprehend, and ask questions about why the human
and physical systems occur in particular patterns and combinations, such as: Where are they on
Earth’s surface? Why are they there? What are the consequences for people and the environment?
For example, large quantities of the world’s petroleum resources are located near the Persian Gulf.
They are at that location due to Earth’s physical processes in the past. The consequences are that
availability and cost of petroleum are affected by the political, economic, territorial, and military events
that occur in and near the Persian Gulf region.
The study of geography as a discipline is approached in two ways. One is as a regional study in
which Earth is examined by areas that share a similar criterion or continuity. For example, a regional
criterion may be geopolitical. Examples include Michigan as a state and Canada as a country, each
with its particular geopolitical boundaries and legal jurisdictions. The second approach is systematic
geography. Earth is examined by topics that share common attributes, but may occur in different
regions. Examples include urbanization and the spatial structure and function of cities. Most cities have
a central business district, satellite business centers in the suburbs, and social, economic, and ethnic
residential patterns that spread across the urban space. At times, regional and systematic geographic
studies merge, such as the study of migration to urban centers in Mexico, Central, and South America.
A similar study of migration could be completed for Africa or Asia. Among the systematic topics are
human/cultural, economic, historical, physical, and political geography. Geographic studies may be
based on continents, groups of countries, an individual country, or a region within a country. The
criteria for a region may include religion, language, and ethnicity. The spatial pattern of topics may
cross political boundaries and connect continents, such as Islam within Africa, Europe, and Asia.
Geography bridges the social and physical sciences by asking questions and seeking answers to those
questions through inquiry. In doing so, students apply skills and develop habits of mind that they will
be able to use in the diverse societies and workplaces of the community, the nation, and the world.
Maps, satellite images of Earth, Geographic Information Systems (GIS), Geographic Positioning
Systems (GPS), and other resources on the world wide web provide valuable information about the
spatial patterns on Earth. The tools of modern geography are based on modern technology. The
technology is the means to explore the world and inquire about the spatial patterns and dynamic
processes that shape the world in which we live.

MICHIGAN’S CONTENT EXPECTATIONS
The high school expectations begin with a short set of foundational expectations, and include United
States Historical Eras 5-9, culminating in current policy debates.
Foundational Issues in United States History and Geography:
ERA 6 – The Development of an Industrial, Urban, and Global United States, 1870-1930
ERA 7 – The Great Depression and World War II, 1920-1945
ERA 8 – Post-war United States, 1945-1989
ERA 9 – America in a New Global Age, 1989 to the present

CONCLUSION
As Michigan students study United States History and Geography, they will learn about the American
experience over time and space. They will encounter powerful and sometimes conflicting ideas while
learning about people and events in different places and times. They will investigate our diverse and
common traditions, and work to understand the complex interactions among various environmental,
human, and social forces that have influenced and continue to influence America and Americans.
Studying United States History and Geography connects us to people and events across time and
space, illuminating the range and depth of human experience on grand as well as local scales. It
involves an analytical study of the nation’s political ideals, as well as times and places where people or
events challenged, violated, or expanded those ideals.
104
      This offers Michigan teachers and students both rewards and challenges. We should harbor no illusions
      about the challenges awaiting teachers and students engaged in such study. Historical and geographic
      literacy demands that students learn to read critically; analyze and evaluate arguments; and decide
      which positions, given the evidence, are more or less plausible, better, or worse. While they learn
      about the facts, events, and significant developments, historical and geographic study asks students to
      consider what they know, how they know it, and how confidently or tentatively they hold their views.
      It is equally important to remember the pleasures that such historical study can provide both teachers
      and students. A disciplined study of history and geography helps us to locate ourselves and our society
      among other peoples and societies in the world. It prepares us to take up the challenges of life in
      the 21st century, by enabling us to understand the world that we encounter daily and developing
      the habits of mind essential for democratic citizenship. Using history and geography, teachers can fill
      the class with enduring human dramas and dilemma, grand successes and equally grand tragedies,
      fascinating mysteries, and an amazing cast of characters involved in events that exemplify the best
      and worst of human experience. In what other field of study can students experience such a range of
      possibilities and get to know so many people and places?
      The study of history and geography is well worth our efforts because it is so vital. Learning about our
      nation and its place in the world is essential for every individual. Understanding the world’s peoples,
      cultures, and societies and the story of our past is no longer a luxury but a necessity for Americans
      in the 21st century. Michigan students need the best understanding of the world and its past we can
      give them. A disciplined study of world history and geography promotes exactly the type of reasoned
      thought our students deserve, and that democratic societies so desperately need.




                    Sample U.S. History and Geography Compelling and Supporting Question
      HS USHG      Was the vote   1) Why did some Americans oppose granting suffrage to women?
                    enough?       2) What were the primary arguments used by the suffragettes and the opposition?
                                  3) What were some rights not gained in the Nineteenth Amendment?
                                  4) What was the Equal Rights Amendment?




                                  Standards Connection: 6.3.1, 6.3.2, 6.3.3




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		            		                  MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                         105

USING THE U.S. HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY HSCE: THINGS TO REMEMBER
There are a number of important considerations for teachers to keep in mind as they use these
United States History and Geography expectations to plan instruction. It is important to remember
that this document:
INTEGRATES GEOGRAPHY AND HISTORY
In meeting these expectations, students will use the content and habits of mind of both history
and geography to study America’s past and present. This document uses a temporal organizational
scheme to present the content expectations.
USES HISTORICAL AND GEOGRAPHIC THINKING
All of the expectations require students to think – analyze, synthesize, evaluate, compare, contrast,
argue – using history’s and geography’s habits of mind. In meeting the expectations, students
will use historical and geographic thinking to analyze and interpret information in developing their
understanding. Students will gather, analyze, and use information and evidence in their thinking.
In identifying specific events and patterns, these expectations do not intend to stress memory over
meaning, or coverage over understanding. While knowledge of specific names, places, dates, and
facts is essential for historical and geographical study, high quality teaching and learning demands a
great deal more than just the mastery of discrete collections of facts.
REQUIRES ACTIVE, DISCIPLINED INQUIRY
In using history and geography’s habits of mind, students should engage in active, disciplined
inquiry, analysis, and argumentation. This entails learning how to read, write, and use history and
geography to understand and participate in the world around us. This calls upon students to frame
important historical and geographic problems and questions concerning cause and effect, continuity
and change, place and time; to locate and analyze appropriate evidence and data; and to determine
significance in building reasoned and evidenced-based interpretations, arguments, or decisions. In
short, historical and geographic inquiry provides Michigan students with the kind of reasoned and
informed decision making that should characterize each citizen’s participation in American society.
REPRESENTS CONTENT EXPECTATIONS AND NOT PEDAGOGICAL ORGANIZATION
This document lists content expectations for students. It does not establish a suggested organization
for teaching or learning this content. For example, this document does not present expectations in
a suggested instructional sequence. Further, individual expectations do not represent single lessons,
a day’s worth of instruction, or even a unit. Michigan teachers and curriculum coordinators should
combine expectations to structure meaningful learning experiences for their students. For example, a
teacher could use a compelling historical or geographic issue or problem to organize weeks of study,
while coherently employing many content expectations.
DIFFERENTIATES BETWEEN REQUIRED AND SUGGESTED CONTENT
On numerous occasions, the expectations will include examples to help clarify teachable content.
These specific examples are suggestions. Educators may use other examples to meet the
expectations or to guide instruction and the creation of local curriculum and resources. The examples
are not required content but may appear in a prompt of an assessment question; however, the focus
of a state summative assessment question will be the language and content of the expectation itself.
Process and Skills
The Social Studies Process and Skills for High School are repeated in each of the Course/Credit
standards.
106

                      U.S. History and Geography Content Expectations


                                                                        • Indigenous Peoples Life in the
       History Themes                   Era 1 (Grade 5)
                                                                          Americas
                                        Beginnings to 1620
       1. Change and                                                    • American Democratic Values and
                                                                          Constitutional Principles
          Continuity in                                                 • Three World Interactions
          American Society
                                                                        • European Struggle for Control of
       2. The Gathering and                                               North America
                                        Era 2 (Grade 5)
          Interactions of                                               • Atlantic Slave Trade and Origins of
                                        Colonization and
          Peoples, Cultures,            Settlement (1585-1763)            Black America
          and Ideas                                                     • Comparative Life in North
                                                                          America Structure, Functions, and
       3. Economic and                                                    Enumerated Powers of National
          Technological                                                   Government
          Changes and Their                                             • Causes of the American Revolution
                                        Era 3 (Grades 5 & 8)            • The American Revolution and Its
          Relationship to               Revolution and the New            Consequences
          Society, Cultures,            Nation (1754-1800)              • Creating New Government(s) and a
          and Ideas, and the                                              New Constitution
          Environment                                                   • Formation and Implementation of
                                                                          U.S. Foreign Policy
       4. The Changing Role
          of America in the             Era 4 (Grade 8) Expansion       • Political, Economic, and Regional
          World                         and Reform (1792-1861)            Growth
                                                                        • Reform Movements
       Geography
       Themes
       1. Space and Place
                                        Era 5 (Grade 8) Civil War       • Abolition and Anti-Slavery
       2. Environment and               and Reconstruction              • Civil War
          Society                       (1850-1877)                     • Reconstruction

       3. Spatial Dynamics
          and Connections
       4. U.S./Global Issues                                            • Growth of an Industrial and Urban
          and Events                    Era 6 (HS) Development            America (introduced in Grade 8;
                                        of Industrial, Urban,             begins SS-HSCE)
                                        and Global United States        • Becoming a World Power
                                        (1870-1930)                     • Progressivism and Reform




       Disciplinary                     Era 7 (HS) Great                • Growing Crisis of Industrial
       Knowledge                        Depression and World War          Capitalism and Responses
                                        II (1920-1945)                  • World War ll
       •   Historical and
           Geographical
           Knowledge and
           Perspective
                                        Era 8 (HS) Post-World War       • Cold War and the United States
       •   Historical and               II United States                • Domestic Policies
           Geographical                 (1945-1989)                     • Civil Rights in the Post-World War II
           Analysis and                                                   Era
           Interpretation
       •   Thematic
                                                                        • Impact of Globalization on the United
           Analysis of U.S.             Era 9 (HS) America in a           States
           History Eras 6-9             New Global Age                  • Changes in America’s Role in the
                                                                          World
                                                                        • Policy Debates



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		          		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                107

GENERAL SOCIAL SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE, PROCESSES, AND SKILLS
       P1     Reading and Communication
       P2     Inquiry, Research, and Analysis
       P3     Public Discourse and Decision Making
       P4     Civic Participation

UNITED STATES HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY
Eras 6-9 Addressed in USHG HSCE
F1     Foundational Issues in USHG – Eras 1-5 (review of content taught in Grades 5 and
8)
       F1     Political and Intellectual Transformations of America to 1877

USHG ERA 6 – THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN INDUSTRIAL, URBAN, AND GLOBAL
           UNITED STATES (1870-1930)
       6.1    Growth of an Industrial and Urban America (included in Grade 8; begins SS-HSCE)
       6.2    Becoming a World Power
       6.3    Progressive Era

USHG ERA 7 – THE GREAT DEPRESSION AND WORLD WAR II (1920-1945)
       7.1    Growing Crisis of Industrial Capitalism and Responses
       7.2    World War II

USHG ERA 8 – POST-WORLD WAR II UNITED STATES (1945-1989)
       8.1    Cold War and the United States
       8.2    Domestic Changes and Policies
       8.3    Civil Rights in the Post-World War II Era

USHG ERA 9 – AMERICA IN A NEW GLOBAL AGE
       9.1    Impact of Globalization on the United States
       9.2    Changes in America’s Role in the World
       9.3    Policy Debates
108

                                     U.S. HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY

      FOUNDATIONS IN UNITED STATES HISTORY AND GEOGRAPHY: ERAS 1-5
      These foundational expectations are included to help students draw upon their previous
      study of integrated United States History and to connect high school United States Histo-
      ry and Geography with 5th and 8th grade content.
      F1     Political and Intellectual Transformations of America to 1877
           F1.1     Identify the core ideals of American society as reflected in the documents
           below, and analyze the ways that American society moved toward and/or away from
           its core ideals:
            • the Declaration of Independence.
            • the original United States Constitution (including the Preamble).
            • the Bill of Rights.
            • the Gettysburg Address.
            • the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments.
           F1.2    Using the American Revolution, the creation and adoption of the Constitu-
           tion, and the Civil War as touchstones, develop an argument about the changing
           character of American political society and the roles of key individuals across cultures
           in prompting/supporting the change.
           F1.3     Analyze how the changing character of American political society from 1791
           to 1877 had significant impact on the responsibilities of governments through the
           principle of federalism.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                              109
USHG ERA 6 – THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN INDUSTRIAL, URBAN, AND GLOBAL
UNITED STATES (1870-1930)
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to understand
how the rise of corporations, heavy industry, and mechanized farming transformed the
American people, how massive immigration after 1870 as well as new social patterns,
conflicts, and ideas of national unity developed amid growing cultural diversity, and how
the rise of the American labor movement and political issues reflected social and eco-
nomic change.
6.1     Growth of an Industrial and Urban America
 Explain the causes and consequences — both positive and negative — of the Industri-
al Revolution and America’s growth from a predominantly agricultural, commercial, and
rural nation to a more industrial and urban nation between 1870 and 1930.
      6.1.1   Factors in the American Second Industrial Revolution – analyze the factors
      that enabled the United States to become a major industrial power, including:
      • the organizational revolution.
      • the economic policies of government and industrial leaders.
      • the advantages of physical geography.
      • the increase in labor through immigration and migration.
      • the growing importance of the automobile industry.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: the development of corporations
      and organized labor movements; A. Phillip Randolph, Andrew Carnegie and John D.
      Rockefeller.
      6.1.2    Labor’s Response to Industrial Growth – evaluate the different responses
      of labor to industrial change, including the development of organized labor and the
      growth of populism and the populist movement.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: the Knights of Labor, American
      Federation of Labor, the United Mine Workers; Farmer’s Alliance, Grange, Platform for
      the Populist Party, Bryan’s “Cross of Gold” speech.
      6.1.3 Urbanization – explain the causes and consequences of urbanization,
      including:
      • the location and expansion of major urban centers and their link to industry and
        trade.
      • internal migration, including the Great Migration.
      • the development of cities divided by race, ethnicity, and class, as well as the re-
        sulting tensions among and within groups.
      • different perspectives about the immigrant experience.
110
            6.1.4    Growth and Change – explain the social, political, economic, and cultural
            shifts taking place in the United States at the end of the 19th century and beginning
            of the 20th century, by:
            • describing the developing systems of transportation (canals and railroads, includ-
              ing the Transcontinental Railroad), and their impact on the economy and society.
            • describing governmental policies promoting economic development.
            • evaluating the treatment of African Americans, including the rise of segregation
              in the South as endorsed by the Supreme Court’s decision in Plessy v. Ferguson,
              and describing the response of African-Americans to this inequality.
            • describing the policies toward Indigenous Peoples, including removal, reserva-
              tions, the Dawes Act of 1887, and the response of Indigenous Peoples to these
              policies.
      6.2     Becoming a World Power
       Describe and analyze the major changes – both positive and negative – in the role the
      United States played in world affairs after the Civil War, and explain the causes and con-
      sequences of this changing role.
            6.2.1    Growth of U.S. Global Power – describe how America redefined its foreign
            policy between 1890 and 1914 and analyze the causes and consequences of the U.S.
            emergence as an imperial power in this time period, using relevant examples of terri-
            torial expansion and involvement in foreign conflicts.
            6.2.2    World War I – explain the causes of World War I, the reasons for American
            neutrality and eventual entry into the war, and America’s role in shaping the course
            of the war.
            6.2.3     Domestic Impact of World War I – analyze the domestic impact of World War
            I on the growth of the government, the expansion of the economy, the restrictions
            on civil liberties, the expansion of women’s suffrage, and on internal migration.
            Examples may include but are not limited to: War Industries Board, the growth
            of anti-immigrant sentiments, the Sedition Act, the Red Scare, the Palmer Raids.
            6.2.4   Wilson and His Opponents – explain how President Woodrow Wilson’s “Four-
            teen Points” differed from proposals by others, including French and British leaders
            and domestic opponents, in the debate over:
            • the Treaty of Versailles.
            • U.S. participation in the League of Nations.
            • the redrawing of European political boundaries and the resulting geopolitical ten-
              sions that continued to affect Europe.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                 111
6.3     Progressive Era
  Select and evaluate major public and social issues emerging from the changes in indus-
trial, urban, and global America during this period; analyze the solutions or resolutions
developed by America and their consequences (positive/negative – anticipated/unantici-
pated).
      6.3.1  Describe the extent to which industrialization and urbanization between
      1895 and 1930 created the need for progressive reform.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: urban and rural poverty, child la-
      bor, immigration, political corruption, racial and gender discrimination, public health,
      unsafe living conditions, poor working conditions, monopolies, unfair labor practices.
      6.3.2 Analyze the social, political, economic, and cultural changes that occurred
      during the Progressive Era.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: the successes and failures of ef-
      forts to expand women’s rights, including the work of important leaders such as Su-
      san B. Anthony, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Alice Paul; the role of reform organizations
      and movements and individuals in promoting change; the Women’s Christian Tem-
      perance Union; settlement house movement; conservation movement; the National
      Association for the Advancement of Colored People; Carrie Chapman Catt; Eugene
      Debs; W.E.B. DuBois; Upton Sinclair; Ida Tarbell; major changes in the Constitution,
      including Sixteenth, Seventeenth, Eighteenth, and Nineteenth Amendments; the
      Supreme Court’s role in supporting or slowing reform; new regulatory legislation; the
      Pure Food and Drug Act; the Sherman and Clayton Antitrust Acts; the successes and
      failures of the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924.
      6.3.3   Evaluate the historical impact of the Progressive Era with regard to govern-
      mental and industrial reforms.
      6.3.4   Women’s Suffrage – Analyze the successes and failures of efforts to expand
      women’s rights, including the work of important leaders and the eventual ratification
      of the Nineteenth Amendment.
USHG ERA 7 – THE GREAT DEPRESSION AND WORLD WAR II (1920-1945)
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to understand
the changing role of the United States in world affairs through World War II, investigate
the causes of the Great Depression and how it affected American society, and how the
New Deal addressed the Great Depression, transformed American federalism, and initiat-
ed the welfare state.
7.1     Growing Crisis of Industrial Capitalism and Responses
 Evaluate the key events and decisions surrounding the causes and consequences of the
global depression of the 1930s and World War II.
112
       7.1.1   The Twenties – explain and evaluate the significance of the social, cultural,
       and political changes and tensions in the “Roaring Twenties” including:
         • cultural movements such as the Jazz Age, the Harlem Renaissance, and the “Lost
           Generation.”
         • the increasing role of advertising and its impact on consumer purchases.
         • the NAACP legal strategy to attack segregation.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: the Scopes trial, views on and re-
       strictions to immigration, Prohibition, roles of women, mass consumption, fundamen-
       talism, modernism, the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924, the Carlisle Indian Industrial
       School, the Mount Pleasant Indian Industrial Boarding School, Harbor Springs Indian
       Boarding School, the resurgence of the Ku Klux Klan, and nativism.
       7.1.2   Causes and Consequences of the Great Depression – explain and evaluate
       the multiple causes and consequences of the Great Depression by analyzing:
         • the political, economic, environmental, and social causes of the Great Depres-
           sion, including fiscal policy, overproduction, underconsumption, speculation, the
           1929 crash, and the Dust Bowl.
         • the economic and social toll of the Great Depression, including unemployment
           and environmental conditions that affected farmers, industrial workers, and fam-
           ilies.
         • President Herbert Hoover’s policies and their impact, including the Reconstruction
           Finance Corporation.
       7.1.3   The New Deal Era – explain and evaluate President Franklin Roosevelt’s poli-
       cies and tactics during the New Deal era, including:
         • the changing role of the federal government’s responsibilities to protect the envi-
           ronment, meet challenges of unemployment, and to address the needs of work-
           ers, farmers, Indigenous Peoples, the poor, and the elderly.
         • opposition to the New Deal and the impact of the Supreme Court in striking down
           and then accepting New Deal laws.
         • the impact of the Supreme Court on evaluating the constitutionality of various
           New Deal policies.
         • consequences of New Deal policies.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: Frances Perkins, the Dust Bowl
       and the Tennessee Valley, promoting workers’ rights, development of a Social Securi-
       ty program, banking and financial regulation, conservation practices, crop subsidies,
       the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA), the Termination Policy, the Deportation Act of
       1929 Federal housing policies and agricultural efforts (AAA) and impacts on housing
       for marginalized groups, Charles Coughlin, Huey Long.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		   		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                 113
7.2     World War II
 Draw conclusions about the causes and the course of World War II, and the effects of
the war on U.S. society and culture, and its role in world affairs.
      7.2.1  Causes of World War II – analyze the factors contributing to World War II in
      Europe and in the Pacific region, and America’s entry into war, including:
       • political and economic disputes over territory.
       • the differences in the civic and political values of the United States and those of
         Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan.
       • U.S. neutrality.
       • the bombing of Pearl Harbor.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: failure of the Treaty of Versailles;
      the League of Nations; the Munich Agreement; the Neutrality Acts; the Lend Lease
      Act; oil embargo; fascism; militarism, nationalism; imperialism.
      7.2.2   United States and the Course of World War II – evaluate the role of the Unit-
      ed States in fighting the war militarily, diplomatically, and technologically across the
      world.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: Germany-First strategy, the Big
      Three Alliance, and the development of atomic weapons.
      7.2.3    Impact of World War II on American Life – analyze the changes in American
      life brought about by U.S. participation in World War II, including:
       • the mobilization of economic, military, and social resources.
       • the role of women, African Americans, and ethnic minority groups in the war ef-
         fort, including the work of A. Philip Randolph and the integration of U.S. military
         forces.
       • the role of the home front in supporting the war effort.
       • the conflict and consequences around the internment of Japanese-Americans.
      7.2.4    Responses to Genocide – investigate the responses to Hitler’s “Final Solu-
      tion” policy by the Allies, the U.S. government, international organizations, and indi-
      viduals.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: concentration camp liberation,
      Nuremberg war crimes tribunals, and actions by individuals such as Oskar Schindler
      and Irena Sendler as examples of the “righteous among the nations”.
USHG ERA 8 – POST-WORLD WAR II UNITED STATES (1945-1989)
8.1     Cold War and the United States
 Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to investigate
the social transformation of post-war United States, how the Cold War and conflicts in Ko-
rea and Vietnam influenced domestic and international politics, and how the struggle for
racial and gender equality and the extension of civil liberties impacted the United States.
114
            8.1.1   Origins and Beginnings of the Cold War – analyze the factors that contribut-
            ed to the Cold War, including:
            • differences in the civic, ideological, and political values, and in the economic and
              governmental institutions, of the United States and the Soviet Union (U.S.S.R.).
            • diplomatic and political actions by both the United States and the U.S.S.R. in the
              last years of World War II and the years afterward.
            Examples may include but are not limited to: the differences between Com-
            munism and Capitalism, diplomatic decisions made at the Yalta and Potsdam confer-
            ences, the use of the atomic bomb, the Marshall Plan, Truman Doctrine, United Na-
            tions, North American Treaty Organization (NATO), and the Warsaw Pact.
            8.1.2   Foreign Policy During the Cold War – compare the causes and consequences
            of the American policy of containment including:
            • the development and growth of a U.S. national security establishment and intelli-
              gence community.
            • the direct and/or armed conflicts with Communism (for example, but not limited
              to: Berlin, Korea, Cuba).
            • U.S. involvement in Vietnam, and the foreign and domestic consequences of the
              war.
            • indirect (or proxy) confrontations within specific world regions.
            • the arms race and its implications on science, technology, and education.
            Examples may include but are not limited to: the Department of Defense; the
            Department of State; the Central Intelligence Agency; direct conflicts within specific
            world regions, such as Chile, Angola, Iran, Guatemala, and Afghanistan; the relation-
            ship and conflicts with the Soviet Union and China; U.S. military policies and prac-
            tices, special operations, and teams; the launch of Sputnik and the beginning of the
            space race; and the National Defense Education Act (NDEA).
            8.1.3   End of the Cold War – describe the factors that led to the end of the Cold War.
        . Examples may include but are not limited to: detente, policies of the U.S. and
          U.S.S.R. and their leaders President Reagan and Premier Gorbachev, the political
          breakup of the Soviet Union, and the Warsaw Pact.
      8.2     Domestic Policies
       Investigate demographic changes, domestic policies, conflicts, and tensions in post-
      World War II America.
            8.2.1     Demographic Changes – use population data to produce and analyze maps
            that show the major changes in population distribution and spatial patterns and den-
            sity, including the Baby Boom, new immigration, suburbanization, reverse migration
            of African-Americans to the South, the Indian Relocation Act of 1956, and the flow of
            population to the Sunbelt.



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		       		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                              115
      8.2.2  Policy Concerning Domestic Issues – analyze major domestic issues in the
      post-World War II era and the policies designed to meet the challenges by:
      • describing issues challenging Americans, such as domestic anticommunism (Mc-
        Carthyism), labor, poverty, health care, infrastructure, immigration, and the envi-
        ronment.
      • evaluating policy decisions and legislative actions to meet these challenges.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: G.I. Bill of Rights (1944),
      Taft-Hartley Act (1947), Twenty-Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution (1951),
      Federal Highways Act (1956), National Defense Act (1957), EPA (1970).
      8.2.3   Comparing Domestic Policies – focusing on causes, programs, and impacts,
      compare and contrast President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal initiatives, President
      Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society programs, and President Ronald Reagan’s mar-
      ket-based domestic policies.
      8.2.4   Domestic Conflicts and Tensions – analyze and evaluate the competing per-
      spectives and controversies among Americans generated by U.S. Supreme Court
      decisions, the Vietnam War, the environmental movement, the movement for Civil
      Rights (See U.S. History Standards 8.3) and the constitutional crisis generated by
      the Watergate scandal.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: Roe v. Wade, Gideon v. Wain-
      wright, Miranda v. Arizona, Tinker v. Des Moines, Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier, Kent
      State, Students for a Democratic Society (SDS), Robert McNamara, Martin Luther
      King Jr., Muhammad Ali, “flower power,” hippies, beatniks, Rachel Carson, Winona
      LaDuke, the American Indian Movement (AIM), the occupation of Alcatraz, Ralph Na-
      der.
8.3     Civil Rights in the Post-World War II Era
 Examine and analyze the Civil Rights Movement using key events, people, and organi-
 zations.
      8.3.1    Civil Rights Movement – analyze key events, ideals, documents, and organi-
      zations in the struggle for African-American civil rights including:
      • the impact of World War II and the Cold War.
      • Responses to Supreme Court decisions and governmental actions.
      • the Civil Rights Act (1964).
      • protest movements.
      • rights.
      • organizations.
      • civil actions.
116
       Examples may include but are not limited to: racial and gender integration of
       the military; “An American Dilemma”; Jim Crow laws; de jure segregation; Brown
       v. Board of Education; the Civil Rights Act (1957); Little Rock school desegregation;
       the Civil Rights Act (1964); the Voting Rights Act (1965); the integration of base-
       ball; Montgomery Bus Boycott (1955-1956); March on Washington; the Freedom
       Rides; the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People; the Southern
       Christian Leadership Conference; the Student Non-violent Coordinating Committee;
       the Nation of Islam; the Black Panthers; Orval Faubus; Rosa Parks; sit-ins; James
       Meredith; Medgar Evers; Fannie Lou Hamer; Malcolm X; Yuri Kochiyama; the Twen-
       ty-Fourth Amendment; violence in Birmingham; Milliken v. Bradley; the Elliott Larsen
       Act.
       8.3.2    Ideals of the Civil Rights Movement – compare and contrast the ideas in
       Martin Luther King’s March on Washington speech to the ideas expressed in the Dec-
       laration of Independence, the Seneca Falls Resolution, and the Gettysburg Address.
       8.3.3   Women’s Rights – analyze the causes, course, and reaction to the women’s
       rights movement in the 1960s and 1970s.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: the role of population shifts; birth
       control; increasing number of women in the work force; National Organization for
       Women (NOW); Equal Rights Amendment (ERA); Betty Friedan; and Phyllis Schlafly.
       8.3.4   Civil Rights Expanded – evaluate the major accomplishments and setbacks in
       securing civil rights and liberties for all Americans over the 20th century.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: Indigenous Peoples; Latinos/
       Latinas; new immigrants; people with disabilities; the gay and lesbian community;
       the Stonewall riots; the Rehab Act (1973); ADA (1990); American Indian Religious
       Freedom Act (1978); United Farmworkers; Harvey Milk (1978); Ruth Ellis; the Indian
       Civil Rights Act (1968).
       8.3.5    Tensions and Reactions to Poverty and Civil Rights – analyze the causes and
       consequences of the civil unrest that occurred in American cities, by comparing civil
       unrest in Detroit with at least one other American city.
       Examples may include but are not limited to: Los Angeles, Cleveland, Chicago,
       Atlanta, Newark.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		   		             MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                               117
USHG ERA 9 – AMERICA IN A NEW GLOBAL AGE
Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to understand
recent developments in foreign and domestic politics, and the economic, social, and cul-
tural developments in the contemporary United States.
9.1     The Impact of Globalization on the United States
 Explain the impact of globalization on the U.S. economy, politics, society, and role in
 the world.
      9.1.1   Economic Changes – using the changing nature of the American automobile
      industry as a case study, evaluate changes in the American economy created by new
      markets, natural resources, technologies, corporate structures, international competi-
      tion, new sources/methods of production, energy issues, and mass communication.
      9.1.2     Transformation of American Politics – analyze the transformation of American
      politics in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, including:
       • the growth of the conservative movement in national politics, including the role
         of Ronald Reagan.
       • the role of evangelical religion in national politics.
       • the intensification of partisanship.
       • the partisan conflict over the role of government in American life.
       • the role of regional differences in national politics.
9.2     Changes in America’s Role in the World
 Examine the shifting role of the United States on the world stage from 1980 to the
 present.
      9.2.1   United States in the Post-Cold War World – explain the role of the United
      States as a superpower in the post-Cold War world, including advantages, disadvan-
      tages, and new challenges.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: military missions in Lebanon, So-
      malia, Haiti, Bosnia, Kosovo, and the Gulf War.
      9.2.2  9/11 and Responses to Terrorism – analyze how the attacks on 9/11 and the
      response to terrorism have altered American domestic and international policies.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: the Office of Homeland Security,
      Patriot Act, wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, role of the United States in the United Na-
      tions, NATO.
9.3     Policy Debates
      9.3.1   Make a persuasive argument on a public policy issue, and justify the position
      with evidence from historical antecedents and precedents, and Democratic Values or
      Constitutional Principles.
118

                                  THE ARC OF INQUIRY: GRADES 9-12

      Dimension 1: Central to a rich social studies experience is the capability for developing questions that can frame
      and advance an inquiry. Those questions come in two forms: compelling and supporting questions.

      Individually and collaboratively, students construct compelling questions and:
            • explain how a question reflects an enduring issue in the field.
            • explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about interpretations and applications of
                disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question.
            • explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about interpretations and applications of
                disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a supporting question.
            • explain how supporting questions contribute to an inquiry and how, through engaging source work, new
                compelling and supporting questions emerge.

      Dimension 2: The four disciplines within social studies provide the intellectual context for studying how
      humans have interacted with each other and with the environment over time. Each of these disciplines — civics,
      economics, geography, and history — offers a unique way of thinking and organizing knowledge as well as
      systems for verifying knowledge. Dimension 2 focuses on the disciplinary concepts and tools students need to
      understand and apply as they study the specific content described in Michigan’s state standards.

      Dimension 3: Dimension 3 includes the skills students need to analyze information and come to conclusions in
      an inquiry. These skills focus on gathering and evaluating sources, and then developing claims and using evidence
      to support these claims.

      Individually and collaboratively, students:
            • gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views while using the
                origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection.
            • evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source.
            • identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect
                inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims.
            • refine claims and counterclaims, attending to precision, significance, and knowledge conveyed through the
                claim while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.

      Dimension 4: Students should construct and communicate claims for a variety of purposes and audiences.
      These audiences may range from the school classroom to the larger public community.

      Individually and collaboratively, students:
            • construct arguments using precise and knowledgeable claims, with evidence from multiple sources, while
                acknowledging counterclaims and evidentiary weaknesses.
            • construct explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or non-linear), examples, and
                details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and
                weaknesses of the explanation given its purpose (e.g., cause and effect, chronological, procedural,
                technical).
            • present adaptations of arguments and explanations that feature evocative ideas and perspectives on
                issues and topics to reach a range of audiences and venues outside the classroom using print and
                oral technologies (e.g., posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, reports, and maps) and digital
                technologies (e.g., Internet, social media, and digital documentary).
            • critique the use of claims and evidence in arguments for credibility.
            • critique the use of the reasoning, sequencing, and supporting details of explanations.
            • use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of local, regional,
                and global problems; instances of such problems in multiple contexts; and challenges and opportunities
                faced by those trying to address these problems over time and place.
            • assess options for individual and collective action to address local, regional, and global problems by
                engaging in self-reflection, strategy identification, and complex causal reasoning.
            • apply a range of deliberative and democratic strategies and procedures to make decisions and take action
                in their classrooms, schools, and out-of-school civic contexts.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                 		                    MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                            119
           SOCIAL STUDIES PROCESS AND SKILLS: HIGH SCHOOL

P1 READING AND COMMUNICATION – READ AND COMMUNICATE EFFECTIVELY
P1.1 Use appropriate strategies to read and analyze social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and
texts.
P1.2 Interpret primary and secondary source documents for point of view, context, bias, and frame of
reference or perspective.
P1.3 Explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about the interpretation of sources
and the application of disciplinary concepts.
P1.4 Express social science ideas clearly in written, spoken, and graphic forms.
P1.5 Construct and present an argument supported with evidence.

P2 INQUIRY, RESEARCH, AND ANALYSIS
P2.1 Apply methods of inquiry, including asking and answering compelling and supporting questions, to
investigate social science problems.
P2.2 Evaluate data presented in social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and texts for credibility,
considering the origin, authority, structure, and context of the information.
P2.3 Know how to find, organize, evaluate, and interpret information from a variety of credible
sources.
P2.4 Use relevant information from multiple credible sources representing a wide range of views
considering the origin, authority, structure, and context to answer a compelling or supporting question.

P3 PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND DECISION MAKING
P3.1 Clearly state an issue as a question of public policy, gather and interpret information about that
issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
P3.2 Discuss public policy issues, by clarifying position, considering opposing views, and applying core
values or Constitutional Principles to develop and refine claims.
P3.3 Construct claims and refine counter-claims that express and justify decisions on public policy
issues.
P3.4 Critique the use of reasoning, sequence, and supporting details in creating a claim and the
subsequent evidence used to support a claim for credibility.

P4 CIVIC PARTICIPATION
P4.1 Act within the rule of law and hold others to the same standard.
P4.2 Assess options for individual and collective action to advance views on matters of public policy
and to address local, regional, or global problems.
P4.3 Plan, conduct, and evaluate the effectiveness of activities intended to advance views on matters
of public policy and to address local, regional, or global problems.
120
                                                            CIVICS
      “We have it in our power to begin the world over again.” Thomas Paine introduced the great American
      experiment with anticipation of what might happen next. When framing their hopes for a new world, the
      founding generation kept one eye on the past and one on the future. Putting aspirations, goals, and law to
      paper, the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of the Confederation, and the Constitution illustrate
      how people may come together united in hope for a better society.

      A proposition for every new generation is:
        1) how to acknowledge contradictions between Democratic Values and the inequalities of their practice;
        2) how to resolve competing, complementary, and vague processes outlined in the founding documents;
        and
        3) how interpretations of the values and principles may differ producing vigorous dialogue, discussion,
        and debate.

      This document provides a framework to encourage students to understand, appreciate, and participate in
      the conversation.

      2019 REVISIONS
      Standard expectations provide the necessary benchmarks for an educated, informed civic society. These
      standards seek to allow teachers to elevate the classroom discussion to one where students grapple with
      the historical and contemporary realities of civic society. Organized into the following six strands, there is
      both greater clarity of purpose and precision of language:


        GENERAL SOCIAL SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE, PROCESSES, AND SKILLS
                P1      Reading and Communication
                P2      Inquiry, Research, and Analysis
                P3      Public Discourse and Decision Making
                P4      Civic Participation

        CIVICS CONTENT STATEMENT OUTLINE
        C1 Philosophical Foundations of Civic Society and Government
        C2 Origins and Foundations of Government of the United States of America
                2.1 Origins of American Constitutional Government
                2.2 Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles
        C3 Structure and Function of Governments in the United States of America
                3.1 Structures, Functions, Powers, and Limits of the Federal Government
                3.2 Structure, Functions, Powers, and Limits of the State, Local, and Tribal Governments
        C4 Rights and Liberties in the United States of America
                4.1 Application of the Bill of Rights
                4.2 The Extension of Civil Rights and Liberties
                4.3 Examining Tensions and Limits on Rights and Liberties
        C5 The United States of America and World Affairs
                5.1 Formation and Implementation of U.S. Foreign Policy
                5.2 U.S. Role in International Institutions and Affairs
        C6 Citizenship and Civic Participation in the United States of America
                6.1 Citizenship in the United States of America
                6.2 Rights and Responsibilities in Civic Society
                6.3 Dispositions for Civic Participation
                6.4 Civic Inquiry, Public Policy, Civic Action, and Public Discourse



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                   		                    MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                121
In the charts below, each strand is followed by examples of compelling questions. A compelling question
addresses an enduring issue, concern, or debate that provides opportunities for students to explore our
polity in an in-depth and thorough fashion. Examples of compelling questions illustrate ways in which the
underlying tension, essence, and/or bigger civic question may emerge.

Each strand also includes processes and skills necessary for successful participation in our form of gov-
ernment. Analytical and research skills help students identify, describe, explain, and analyze information
and arguments, as well as evaluate, take, and defend positions on public policies. The process and skills
possibilities listed below are examples that may tie together content expectations with skills for lively and
interactive civics classrooms. Translating the classroom experience into real life, knowledge, dispositions,
Democratic Values, and participatory skills are intertwined to position students to be positive members of
American society.

Outline of the Civic Strands, Compelling Questions, and Process Skills Possibilities

C1 Philosophical Foundations of Civic Society and Government
Compelling Questions:
• How might both the pursuit of the common good and the protection of unalienable rights (including
   life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness) create tension in the structure and pursuit of governance?
• In what ways does the structure of government influence our possibilities as a society and reveal
   societal values?
Process and Skills Possibilities:
• Collaboratively design your own society to represent the rights you envision each person or group of
   people to have alongside appropriate governmental powers.

C2 Founding and Development of the Government of the United States of America
Compelling Questions:
• In what ways might the federal and state governments reflect characteristics of both direct democra-
   cy and a representative republic (or neither)? What might be the best forms of representation?
• In what ways has the Constitution created a just government? In what ways has the Constitution
   created an unjust government? What, if any, remedies were embedded to address problems in the
   Constitution?
Process and Skills Possibilities:
• Analyze founding documents to find Democratic Values. Connect the Democratic Values to mecha-
   nisms in the Constitution or subsequent documents.
• Convene a Constitutional Convention in your class in which you decide what to keep and what to up-
   date collaboratively from the Constitution and the Amendments.

C3 Structure and Function of Governments in the United States of America
Compelling Questions:
• In what ways has the Constitution, and its competitive policy-making process, served to represent
   the people’s will and limit government power to ensure that the people’s will is represented?
• In what ways do the branches of the national government compete and cooperate in order to govern?
• How has the intent of federalism been impacted by provisions within the Constitution and policies
   over time?
Process and Skills Possibilities:
• As a classroom, propose a law and walk it through the complexities of becoming law at the federal
   level.
• As a classroom, propose a law and walk it through the complexities of becoming law at the state
   level.
122

      C4 Rights and Liberties in the United States of America
      Compelling Questions:
      • In what ways has the development and interpretation of the Constitution influenced policies that im-
         pact citizens and people living in the United States?
      • How has (or might) the will of the majority upheld or infringed upon rights of the unenfranchised,
         disenfranchised, or underrepresented?
      • How might the tension between life and liberty balance against the desire for security in an open
         society?
      Process and Skills Possibilities:
      • Research an issue concerning one of the First Amendment five protections (speech, assembly, reli-
         gion, press, petition). Put on a mock trial using the evidence from the case to review the evidence
         and decide. The case could be historical, breaking in the news, or one pending in front of a court.
      • Identify a pressing issue under the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection of the law. Research
         and write amicus briefs exploring all sides of the issue. Present and question the briefs.

      C5 The United States of America and World Affairs
      Compelling Questions:
      • To what degree, if any, should questions of sovereignty and openness impact the United States and
         its foreign policy? What possibilities and challenges are posed in open and closed societies?
      • What, if any, rights of people extend beyond the borders of the United States? What, if any, rights of
         people from abroad exist inside the borders of the United States?
      • In what ways have American political ideas, ideals, and the American Constitutional system influ-
         enced other governments?
      Process and Skills Possibilities:
      • Choose an issue of international importance and convene an international conference where different
         countries discuss their perspectives. As a class, create a position paper on how the United States of
         America views the issue and why.
      • Identify, research, evaluate, take, and defend positions regarding why some aspects of the Ameri-
         can Constitutional system that have been effective in the United States either have or have not been
         used or have not been successful in other countries.

      C6 Citizenship and Civic Participation in the United States of America
      Compelling Questions:
      • What civic skills are necessary for vibrant Constitutional democracies and how might schools cultivate
         healthy civic virtue?
      • To what degree should citizens be required to be involved in the responsibilities of citizenship? What
         might be some of the most important legal and moral rights and obligations of citizenship?
      Process and Skills Possibilities:
      • Collaboratively, identify and discuss community needs that have potential public policy solutions. De-
         velop possible solutions, evaluate their pros and cons, and choose one to defend in a simulated public
         hearing. Develop and defend a proposal for appropriate public policy officials.
      • Research and design a campaign to educate and encourage students in your school to vote. Create
         simulated voting opportunities for students throughout your district to experience voting.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		           		                 MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                                                        123
Governance, Democratic Values, Constitutional Principles, and a Right to Remedy – Possibilities
and Pitfalls
In acknowledging the complexities of American governance, various terminologies materialize. To clarify
the intent of the Michigan Standards, Democracy refers to the overarching idea that the United States is
a government by and for the people (“We the People”). The question continues — How do we implement
the principles of democracy while ensuring the protection of rights and liberties of all persons in the
United States? Under this umbrella question, multiple forms of governance arise. Examples include but
are limited to a representative republic, direct democracy, and outliers that challenge both conventions
of thought.

Listing the Democratic Values of the United States of America alongside essential Constitutional Principles
reveals the complexities of the historical documents, coupled with the hopes and hypocrisy of the times
themselves. Like the formative documents of the United States themselves, this list represents compro-
mise, hope, and a willingness to work together to keep forging ahead in pursuit of clearer standards.
For the purposes of this document, “Democratic Values” are essential aspirational goals rooted in founding
essential documents, including the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States;
“Constitutional Principles” are ideas and processes derived from Democratic Values as expressed in the
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States. The “right to remedy” refers to
a continuum of options people have for impacting government. The list below provides one way in which
Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles could be organized and does not represent the full possi-
bilities of what such a list could look like. These items have been organized in the following manner:

This chart illustrates one way a class-
room can work through complex                               Representation of Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles
questions of competing and reinforc-
ing ideals (Democratic Values) against
                                                               Democratic Values
competing and reinforcing mechanisms                              Defined:                    Unalienable Rights including:
to achieve those ideals (Constitutional                                                          • life;
                                                       Essential beliefs expressed in            • liberty; and the
Principles). Moreover, exploring a con-                founding documents of the United          • pursuit of happiness.
tinuum of remedy from writing letters,                 States, including the Declaration of   Equality
voting, protest, running for office,                   Independence and the U.S.              Justice
                                                       Constitution.
direct action, and all the way through                                                        Consent of the Governed
                                                                                              Common Good/General Welfare
to abolishing a government under the
most extreme circumstances, allows
                                                                                                                      arrows suggest correlation and
classrooms to explore appropriate ac-                                                                                        interdependence
tion for issues they wish to remedy.                       Constitutional Principles          Equal Protection                Civilian Control of the
                                                                   Defined:                                                   Military and Police
                                                                                              Due Process
To be fleshed out as a suggestion           Key concepts, processes, and         Rule of Law
                                                                                                                 Necessary and Proper
                                                                                                                 (including implied powers)
during professional learning, the con-      dispositions derived from the        Limited Government (including Truth
cept of a taxonomy is an intellectu-        Democratic Values important for      enumerated powers)
                                                                                                                 Diversity
                                            American democracy                   Federalism
ally rigorous and rewarding exercise.                                                                            Patriotism (acting with
                                                                                 Social Contract
Classrooms could collaborate to create                                                                           devotion and integrity to the
                                                                                                                 Democratic Values of the
                                                                                 Checks and Balances
their own taxonomies to see when,                                                Separation of Powers
                                                                                                                 United States)
how, and if various Constitutional Prin-                                         Representative Government
                                                                                                                 Civic Participation
ciples align with particular Democratic
Values. Benefits of such an exercise
include:                                              Right to Remedy
  • opportunities to build perspective                    Defined:
                                                                                               We the People have the right to:
     and empathy in students as they        People have a wide range of options 1) Alter government to create a more perfect union; and/or
     reflect and demonstrate how, if        to address and impact government    2) Abolish a tyrannical government and institute a new
     at all, the interpretation of Dem-                                         government laying its foundations on Democratic Values.

     ocratic Values and Constitutional
     Principles may change based on
     someone’s point of view, social situation, or place in time.
  • opportunities to assess the relative effectiveness of Constitutional Principles at upholding certain Dem-
     ocratic Values.
  • opportunities for continual teacher assessment to guide students in their learning as they discuss their
     ongoing understanding of the Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles.
  • opportunities to evaluate change over time by utilizing primary documents and the narratives of real
124
        people throughout history, demonstrating how the meaning or actualization of Democratic Values may
        change in changing cultures.
      • opportunities for students to reflect for themselves their own belief systems and where and how they
        prioritize Democratic Values and Constitutional Principles.


       USING THE CIVICS HSCE: THINGS TO REMEMBER
       There are a number of important considerations for teachers to keep in mind as they use these Civics
       expectations to plan instruction. It is important to remember that the application of content of this
       document:
       USES CIVICS THINKING
       The expectations require students to think — describe, analyze, synthesize, evaluate, compare,
       contrast, argue respectfully — using political and civics habits of mind. These expectations do not
       intend to stress memory over meaning, or coverage over understanding. While knowledge of names,
       definitions, and facts is essential, high-quality teaching and learning demand a great deal more than
       just the mastery of discrete collections of facts or terms.


       REQUIRES ACTIVE INQUIRY AND PARTICIPATION
       Civic education requires students have an active civic identity — active as investigators, political
       scientists, social scientists, researchers, voters, elected officials, writers, testifiers, organizers,
       campaigners, and so much more in the civic activities of their schools and communities. Shifting
       student identity from passive recipients of knowledge to engaged and purposeful members of society
       requires continued and deliberate practice of deliberative dialogue and discussion.
       Civics entails critical reading, writing, and advocacy. Civics entails knowing how, when, and where to
       use Civics concepts and knowledge to understand and participate in the world.
       This calls upon students to: frame important questions; locate and analyze appropriate evidence and
       data; consider differing points of view, apply concepts and principles to build reasoned and evidence-
       based interpretations, arguments, or decisions; and participate in democratic deliberations around
       public policy issues. In short, Civics should help Michigan students make reasoned and informed
       decisions and understand how to fully participate in American society.


       REPRESENTS CONTENT EXPECTATIONS AND NOT PEDAGOGICAL ORGANIZATION
       This document lists content expectations for students. It does not establish suggested organization
       for teaching or learning this content. For example, this document is not presenting expectations in a
       suggested instructional sequence. The expectations do not represent single lessons, a day’s worth of
       instruction, or even a unit. Michigan teachers and curriculum coordinators can combine expectations
       to structure meaningful learning experiences for their students. For example, a teacher could use
       a compelling public policy issue or problem to organize weeks of study, while coherently employing
       many content expectations.


       DIFFERENTIATES BETWEEN REQUIRED AND SUGGESTED CONTENT
       On numerous occasions, the expectations will include examples to help clarify teachable content.
       Examples are listed in “Examples may include but are not limited to” below the content expectation.
       Local districts and the teachers may use these ideas as starting points for their instruction and may
       include examples to reflect their own local experiences relevant to the curriculum. The examples are
       not required content, yet may appear in a prompt of an assessment question; however, the focus of
       a state summative assessment question will be the language and content of the expectation itself.


       Process and Skills
       The Social Studies Process and Skills for High School are repeated in each of the Course/Credit
       Standards.



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		           		                 MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                          125

                                        CIVICS


C1 Philosophical Foundations of Civic Society and Government
   C – 1.1.1     Describe, compare, and contrast political philosophers views on
   purposes of government(s) including but not limited to Aristotle, Locke, Hobbes,
   Montesquieu, and Rousseau.
   C – 1.1.2     Identify, provide examples of, and distinguish among different systems
   of government by analyzing similarities and differences in sovereignty, power,
   legitimacy, and authority.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: anarchy, dictatorship, democracy,
   monarchy, oligarchy, republic, theocracy, military junta, socialist, and tribal
   governments.
   C – 1.1.3    Compare, contrast, and evaluate models of representation in
   democratic governments including presidential and parliamentary systems.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: direct democracy, constitutional
   democracy, constitutional republic, representative democracy, indirect democracy/
   republic.
   C – 1.1.4   Compare and contrast federal, confederal, and unitary systems of
   government by analyzing similarities and differences in sovereignty and distribution
   of governmental powers.
C2 Founding and Development of the Government of the United States of
America
C2.1 Origins of the American Constitutional Government
   C – 2.1.1      Analyze the historical and philosophical origins of American
   Constitutional Democracy and analyze the influence of ideas found in the Magna
   Carta, Declaration of Independence, Articles of Confederation, and John Locke’s
   Second Treatise.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the Iroquois Confederation,
   English Bill of Rights, Mayflower Compact, Northwest Ordinance, Virginia Statute for
   Religious Freedom, Montesquieu’s Spirit of Laws, Paine’s Common Sense, Aristotle’s
   Politics, and select Federalist Papers (10th, 14th, and 51st).
   C – 2.1.2     Identify and analyze various Democratic Values of the United States as
   found in the Declaration of Independence.
   Examples of Democratic Values may include but are not limited to: justice,
   unalienable rights (life, liberty, pursuit of happiness), and equality.
   Analysis may include but is not limited to: how might the ideals in the
   Declaration have been in tension with reality?
126
         C – 2.1.3      Explain the impact of the major debates and compromises underlying
         the drafting and ratification of the American Constitution including the Virginia and
         New Jersey plans, the Great Compromise, debates between Federalists and Anti-
         Federalists, debates concerning slavery, and the promise for a Bill of Rights after
         ratification.
      C2.2 Democratic Values and U.S. Constitutional Principles
         C – 2.2.1      Analyze relationships between Democratic Values and Constitutional
         Principles.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: ways in which the Constitutional
         Principle of due process of laws correlates with the Democratic Value of justice, ways
         in which the Constitutional Principle of equal protection of the law correlates with the
         Democratic Value of equality.
         C – 2.2.2     Analyze how influential historical speeches, writings, cases, and laws
         express Democratic Values and influenced changes in American culture, law, and the
         Constitution.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: equality; drawing upon Martin
         Luther King’s “I Have a Dream” speech and “Letter from Birmingham City Jail”; the
         Universal Declaration of Human Rights; the Declaration of Sentiments; the Equal
         Rights Amendment; and Dred Scott v. Sandford, Plessy v. Ferguson, Loving v.
         Virginia, the Americans With Disabilities Act, and Obergefell v. Hodges.
         C – 2.2.3    Use examples to investigate why people may agree on Democratic
         Values and Constitutional Principles in the abstract, yet disagree over their meaning
         when they are applied to specific situations.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: liberty and authority/order, justice
         and equality, individual rights and the common good.
      C3 Structure and Function of Governments in the United States of America
      C3.1 Structure, Functions, Powers, and Limits of Federal Government
         C – 3.1.1     Identify and describe the purposes, organization, powers, processes,
         and election of the legislative branch as enumerated in Article I of the Constitution.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: the House of Representatives
         and Senate (including election and qualifications to hold office), advise and consent,
         impeachment, power of the purse, approval of treaties, and war powers.
         C – 3.1.2     Identify and describe the purposes, organization, powers, processes,
         and election of the executive branch as enumerated in Article II of the Constitution.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: the President (including election
         and qualifications to hold office), Commander-in-Chief, appointment power,
         presidential pardon, executive departments, due care (faithful execution of the laws)
         clause, independent regulatory agencies, treaty negotiations, veto power, electoral
         college, Twenty-fifth Amendment.



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             127
   C – 3.1.3     Identify and describe the purposes, organization, powers, processes,
   and appointment or election of the judicial branch as enumerated in Article III of the
   Constitution and as established in Marbury v. Madison.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the Supreme Court (nomination
   and appointment process, lifetime tenure), original and appellate jurisdictions,
   resolution of disputes.
   C – 3.1.4    Examine and evaluate the effectiveness the role of separation of
   powers and checks and balances in regard to the distribution of power and authority
   between the three branches of government.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: advise and consent, power of the
   purse, veto power, judicial review, war powers, treaty negotiation and approval, the
   necessary and proper clause, and impeachment.
   C – 3.1.5      Analyze the various levels and responsibilities in the federal and state
   judicial systems and explain the relationships among them.
   C – 3.1.6     Evaluate major sources of revenue and major expenditures of the
   federal government.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: discretionary spending, federal
   income tax, and mandatory spending.
   C – 3.1.7     Identify and explain how Supreme Court decisions and provisions in
   the U.S. Constitution have impacted the power of the federal government.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the Bill of Rights, rule of law,
   enumerated powers, implied powers, federalism, and McCulloch v. Maryland.
C3.2 Structure and Functions of State, Local, and Tribal Governments
   C – 3.2.1     Describe limits the U.S. Constitution places on powers of the states
   and on the federal government’s power over the states.
   Examples of limits on state power include but are not limited to: prohibitions
   against coining money, impairing interstate commerce, making treaties with foreign
   governments.
   Examples of limits on federal power over states include but are not limited
   to: federal government cannot abolish a state; Tenth Amendment reserves powers
   to the states; federal government cannot commandeer state employees.
   C – 3.2.2   Explain interactions and tensions among federal, state, and local
   governments using the necessary and proper clause, the Commerce Clause, and the
   Tenth Amendment.
   C – 3.2.3       Describe how state, local, and tribal governments are organized,
   their major responsibilities, and how they affect the lives of people residing in their
   jurisdiction(s).
128
         C – 3.2.4      Analyze sovereignty of tribal governments in interactions with U.S.
         governments, including treaty formation, implementation, and enforcement between
         federal, state, and local governments and tribal governments.
         C – 3.2.5      Evaluate the major sources of revenue and expenditures for state,
         local, and tribal governments.
         C – 3.2.6    Describe and evaluate referendums, initiatives, and recall as
         mechanisms used to influence state and local government. Use a case study to
         examine the impact of one such listed mechanism.
      C3.3 Additional Actors and Influences in American Civic Society
         C – 3.3.1      Describe and analyze how groups and individuals influence public
         policy.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: political action committees,
         voluntary organizations, professional organizations, civic organizations, media.
         C – 3.3.2     Describe the evolution of political parties and their contemporary
         influence on public policy.
         C – 3.3.3      Explain the concept of public opinion, factors that shape it, and
         contrasting views on the role it should and does play in public policy.
         C – 3.3.4       Explain the significance of campaigns and elections in American
         politics, current criticisms of campaigns, and proposals for their reform.
         C – 3.3.5     Identify and discuss roles of non-governmental organizations in
         American civic society.
         C – 3.3.6    Explain functions and possible influence of various news and other
         media sources in political communication.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: television, print, press, Internet
         (including social media), radio.
         C – 3.3.7   Analyze the credibility and validity of various forms of political
         communication.
         Examples of analysis may include but are not limited to: logic, factual
         accuracy, selective omission, emotional appeal, distorted evidence, appeals to bias or
         prejudice, confirmation and source bias.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		    		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             129
C4 Rights and Liberties in the United States of America
C4.1 Application of the Bill of Rights
   C – 4.1.1       Describe the five essential rights protected by the First Amendment.
   Through the use of court cases and examples, explore and analyze the scope and
   limits of First Amendment rights.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: Schenck v. United States,
   Brandenburg v. Ohio, Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District,
   Bethel School District v. Fraser, Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier, Texas v.
   Johnson, New York Times Co. v. United States, Village of Skokie v. National Socialist
   Party, Minersville School District v. Gobitis, West Virginia State Board of Education
   v. Barnette, Engel v. Vitale, Lemon v. Kurtzman, Wisconsin v. Yoder, NAACP v.
   Alabama.
   C – 4.1.2      Using the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Amendments,
   describe the rights of the accused; using court cases and examples, describe the
   limit and scope of these rights.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: search and seizure, right to an
   attorney, due process, double jeopardy, right to speedy trial, right to impartial jury,
   right to witnesses, no cruel or unusual punishment. Court cases include, but are
   not limited to: Mapp v. Ohio, Katz v. United States, New Jersey v. T.L.O., Riley v.
   California, Gideon v. Wainwright, Miranda v. Arizona, Gregg v. Georgia.
C4.2   Extensions of Civil Rights and Civil Liberties
   C – 4.2.1     Explain how the Civil War led to the creation of the Thirteenth,
   Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution. Analyze each
   Amendment’s relative effectiveness.
   C – 4.2.2      Explain how significant historical events, including but not limited to
   the suffrage movements and the civil rights movements, resulted in changes to the
   interpretation of and Amendments to the U.S. Constitution.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: suffrage movements (Fifteenth,
   Nineteenth, Twenty-Third, Twenty-Fourth, Twenty-Sixth Amendments), and the civil
   rights movements (Twenty-Fourth, Twenty-Sixth Amendments).
   C – 4.2.3      Using the Fourteenth Amendment, describe the impact of the doctrine
   of incorporation, due process of law, and equal protection of law on the articulation
   and extension of rights.
   Examples may include court cases and pieces of legislation that include but
   are not limited to: Civil Rights Act of 1964, Voting Right Act of 1965, Barron v.
   Baltimore, Slaughterhouse cases, Gitlow v. New York, Gideon v. Wainwright, Mapp
   v. Ohio, Meyer v. Nebraska, Griswold v. Connecticut, Roe v. Wade, Cantwell v.
   Connecticut, McDonald v. Chicago, Shelby County v. Holder, Obergefell v. Hodges,
   United States v. Wong Kim Ark.
130
      C4.3 Examining Tensions and Limits on Rights and Liberties
         C – 4.3.1      Identify and explain personal rights, political rights, and economic
         rights as well as how these rights might conflict.
         Examples of personal rights include but are not limited to: freedom of
         thought, conscience, expression, association, movement and residence, privacy,
         personal autonomy, due process of law, free exercise of religion, and equal protection
         of the law.
         Examples of political rights include but are not limited to: freedom of speech,
         press, assembly, and petition; the right to vote and run for public office.
         Examples of economic rights include but are not limited to: acquire, use,
         transfer, and dispose of property; choose one’s work, change employment, join labor
         unions and professional associations; establish and operate a business; copyright
         protection; enter into lawful contracts; just compensation for the taking of private
         property for public use.
         C – 4.3.2      Describe considerations, criteria, and examples that have been used to
         deny, limit, or extend protection of individual rights.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: clear and present danger; time,
         place, and manner restrictions on speech; compelling government interest; security;
         libel or slander; public safety; and equal opportunity.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: Dred Scott, Plessy v. Ferguson,
         Korematsu v. United States.
      C5 The United States of America and World Affairs
      C5.1 Formation and Implementation of U.S. Foreign Policy
         C – 5.1.1      Identify and describe ways in which foreign policy is made including
         Constitutional powers of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches and how
         those powers have been clarified or interpreted over time.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: Senate treaty ratification powers,
         Senate advise and consent of political appointments, Congressional declarations of
         war, War Powers Act of 1973, executive orders and related injunctions, power of the
         purse.
         C – 5.1.2    Analyze past and present examples of U.S. foreign policy, its
         implementation, and its impact on American and international institutions and
         individuals.
         Examples of policies may include but are not limited to: immigration policies,
         nuclear treaties, Paris Accords and climate change, war on terrorism, space
         treaties, privatization and militarism of space, the Spanish-American War, American
         isolationism, the Atlantic Charter, cold war containment, post-cold war policy, modern
         treaties, tariffs, trade wars, cyber-security, gag rules.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		    		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             131
   Examples of implementation may include but are not limited to: diplomacy,
   sanctions, treaties, military actions, covert actions, Peace Corps, humanitarian aid.
   C – 5.1.3     Describe ways in which groups and individuals influence foreign policy.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: political action committees,
   voluntary organizations, professional organizations, civic organizations, media,
   individuals’ public opinions, interest groups, the media news cycles, think tanks,
   foreign policy.
C5.2 U.S. Role in International Institutions and Affairs
   C – 5.2.1      Analyze the influence and impact of U.S. political, economic,
   technological, and cultural developments on countries and people around the world.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: foreign policy, popular culture,
   fashion, music, Democratic Values, Constitutional Principles, backlash.
   C – 5.2.2      Analyze how international political, economic, technological, and
   cultural developments impact U.S. institutions and individuals.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: multinational corporations,
   terrorism, regional organizations, trade, migration, human trafficking,
   telecommunications.
   C – 5.2.3      Identify and evaluate the roles and responsibilities of the United
   States in international governmental organizations including bilateral and multilateral
   agreements.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: the United Nations, North Atlantic
   Treaty Organization, Organization of American States, USMCA, Helsinki Accords,
   Antarctic Treaty, Most Favored Nation Agreements, Paris Climate Accords, and
   Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
   C – 5.2.4     Identify and evaluate international non-governmental organizations.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: International Red Cross, Amnesty
   International, Doctors Without Borders.
C6 Citizenship and Civic Participation in the United States of America
C6.1 Citizenship in the United States of America
   C – 6.1.1      Describe and evaluate the requirements and process for becoming a
   citizen of the United States.
   C – 6.1.2     Explain how the United States has limited and expanded citizenship
   over time.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: legislation, Constitutional
   Amendments.
132
         C – 6.1.3       Compare and contrast rights and representation among U.S. people
         and citizens living in states, territories, federal districts, and on tribally governed
         land.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: District of Columbia, Guam,
         Puerto Rico, Northern Mariana Islands, U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, Tribal
         Governments.
      C6.2 Rights and Responsibilities in Civic Society
         C – 6.2.1      Using examples, explain the rights and responsibilities of U.S. citizens
         as well all people living in the United States.
         Examples unique to citizens include but are not limited to*: voting in national,
         state, and local elections, serving as a juror, running for elected office.
         Examples for all persons living in the United States as lawful permanent
         residents include but are not limited to: serving in the armed forces, voting in
         local jurisdictions, serving on some local juries, registering to vote.
         Examples for all persons living in the United States include but are not
         limited to:
         • participating in public life.
         • participating in political life.
         • being informed about laws that govern society.
         • respecting and obeying just laws.
         • stay informed and attentive about public issues.
         • monitoring political leaders and governmental agencies.
         • assuming community leadership when appropriate.
         • paying taxes.
         • registering to vote and voting knowledgeably on candidates and issues.
         • performing public service.
         • assuming leadership when appropriate.
         *
          incarceration is an exception in some states.
      C6.3 Dispositions for Civic Participation
         C – 6.3.1    Explain the personal dispositions that contribute to knowledgeable and
         engaged participation in civic communities.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: concern for the well-being of
         others, civility, respect for the rights of other individuals, respect for law, honesty,
         open-mindedness, negotiation and compromise, persistence, civic-mindedness,
         compassion, patriotism, courage, and tolerance for ambiguity.


  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		      		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                             133
   C – 6.3.2     Explain how informed members of society influence civic life.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: obeying just law, disobeying
   unjust law, being informed and attentive to public issues, monitoring political leaders
   and governmental agencies, assuming leadership when appropriate, paying taxes,
   registering to vote and voting knowledgeably on candidates and issues, serving as a
   juror, serving in the armed forces, performing public service.
C6.4 Civic Inquiry, Public Policy, Civic Action, and Public Discourse
   C – 6.4.1     Explain and evaluate how people, individually or collectively, seek to
   bring the United States closer to its Democratic Values.
   C – 6.4.2     Identify, discuss, and analyze methods individuals and/or groups have
   chosen to attempt social and legal change. Assess the effects of civil disobedience,
   social movements, demonstrations, protests on society and law.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: abolitionists, women’s suffrage
   movement, Civil Rights movement, direct action, sit-down strikes, walk-outs.
   C – 6.4.3      Identify and describe a local, state, national, or international public
   policy issue; research and evaluate multiple solutions; analyze the consequences of
   each solution and propose, defend, and take relevant action to address or resolve
   the issue.
   Considerations for research may include but are not limited to: primary and
   secondary sources, legal documents (Constitutions, court decisions, state law), non-
   text based information (oral speeches/presentations, political cartoons, campaign
   advertisements), and other forms of political communication (speeches and blogs).
   Considerations for analyzing credible sources may include but are not
   limited to: logical validity, factual accuracy and/or omission, emotional appeal,
   unstated assumptions, logical fallacies, inconsistencies, distortions, appeals to bias
   or prejudice, overall strength of argument.
   C – 6.4.4     Equip students with the skills and knowledge to explore multiple
   pathways for knowledgeable, civic engagement through simulations and/or real-
   world opportunities for involvement.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: trials, school board meetings,
   congressional hearings, running for office, letters to the editor, political campaigns.
134


                                  THE ARC OF INQUIRY: GRADES 9-12

      Dimension 1: Central to a rich social studies experience is the capability for developing questions that can frame
      and advance an inquiry. Those questions come in two forms: compelling and supporting questions.

      Individually and collaboratively, students construct compelling questions and:
            • explain how a question reflects an enduring issue in the field.
            • explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about interpretations and applications of
                disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a compelling question.
            • explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about interpretations and applications of
                disciplinary concepts and ideas associated with a supporting question.
            • explain how supporting questions contribute to an inquiry and how, through engaging source work, new
                compelling and supporting questions emerge.

      Dimension 2: The four disciplines within social studies provide the intellectual context for studying how
      humans have interacted with each other and with the environment over time. Each of these disciplines — civics,
      economics, geography, and history — offers a unique way of thinking and organizing knowledge as well as
      systems for verifying knowledge. Dimension 2 focuses on the disciplinary concepts and tools students need to
      understand and apply as they study the specific content described in Michigan’s state standards.

      Dimension 3: Dimension 3 includes the skills students need to analyze information and come to conclusions in
      an inquiry. These skills focus on gathering and evaluating sources, and then developing claims and using evidence
      to support these claims.

      Individually and collaboratively, students:
            • gather relevant information from multiple sources representing a wide range of views while using the
                origin, authority, structure, context, and corroborative value of the sources to guide the selection.
            • evaluate the credibility of a source by examining how experts value the source.
            • identify evidence that draws information directly and substantively from multiple sources to detect
                inconsistencies in evidence in order to revise or strengthen claims.
            • refine claims and counterclaims, attending to precision, significance, and knowledge conveyed through the
                claim while pointing out the strengths and limitations of both.

      Dimension 4: Students should construct and communicate claims for a variety of purposes and audiences.
      These audiences may range from the school classroom to the larger public community.

      Individually and collaboratively, students:
            • construct arguments using precise and knowledgeable claims, with evidence from multiple sources, while
                acknowledging counterclaims and evidentiary weaknesses.
            • construct explanations using sound reasoning, correct sequence (linear or non-linear), examples, and
                details with significant and pertinent information and data, while acknowledging the strengths and
                weaknesses of the explanation given its purpose (e.g., cause and effect, chronological, procedural,
                technical).
            • present adaptations of arguments and explanations that feature evocative ideas and perspectives on
                issues and topics to reach a range of audiences and venues outside the classroom using print and
                oral technologies (e.g., posters, essays, letters, debates, speeches, reports, and maps) and digital
                technologies (e.g., Internet, social media, and digital documentary).
            • critique the use of claims and evidence in arguments for credibility.
            • critique the use of the reasoning, sequencing, and supporting details of explanations.
            • use disciplinary and interdisciplinary lenses to understand the characteristics and causes of local, regional,
                and global problems; instances of such problems in multiple contexts; and challenges and opportunities
                faced by those trying to address these problems over time and place.
            • assess options for individual and collective action to address local, regional, and global problems by
                engaging in self-reflection, strategy identification, and complex causal reasoning.
            • apply a range of deliberative and democratic strategies and procedures to make decisions and take action
                in their classrooms, schools, and out-of-school civic contexts.



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                 		                    MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                            135

 SOCIAL STUDIES PROCESS AND SKILLS STANDARDS: HIGH SCHOOL

P1 READING AND COMMUNICATION – READ AND COMMUNICATE EFFECTIVELY
P1.1 Use appropriate strategies to read and analyze social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and
texts.
P1.2 Interpret primary and secondary source documents for point of view, context, bias, and frame of
reference or perspective.
P1.3 Explain points of agreement and disagreement experts have about the interpretation of sources
and the application of disciplinary concepts.
P1.4 Express social science ideas clearly in written, spoken, and graphic forms.
P1.5 Construct and present an argument supported with evidence.

P2 INQUIRY, RESEARCH, AND ANALYSIS
P2.1 Apply methods of inquiry, including asking and answering compelling and supporting questions, to
investigate social science problems.
P2.2 Evaluate data presented in social science tables, graphs, graphics, maps, and texts for credibility,
considering the origin, authority, structure, and context of the information.
P2.3 Know how to find, organize, evaluate, and interpret information from a variety of credible
sources.
P2.4 Use relevant information from multiple credible sources representing a wide range of views,
considering the origin, authority, structure, and context, to answer a compelling or supporting
question.

P3 PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND DECISION MAKING
P3.1 Clearly state an issue as a question of public policy, gather and interpret information about that
issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
P3.2 Discuss public policy issues, by clarifying positions, considering opposing views, and applying
democratic values or Constitutional Principles to develop and refine claims.
P3.3 Construct claims and refine counter-claims expressing and justifying decisions on public policy
issues.
P3.4 Critique the use of reasoning, sequence, and supporting details in creating a claim and the
subsequent evidence used to support a claim for credibility.

P4 CIVIC PARTICIPATION
P4.1 Act within the rule of law and hold others to the same standard.
P4.2 Assess options for individual and collective action to advance views on matters of public policy
and address local, regional, or global problems.
P4.3 Plan, conduct, and evaluate the effectiveness of activities intended to advance views on matters
of public policy and to address local, regional, or global problems.
136

                                                 ECONOMICS

      Understanding economics — often referred to as economic literacy — is becoming essential for citizens
      in our national and increasingly interconnected world economy. Productive members of society must be
      able to identify, analyze, and evaluate the causes and consequences of individual economic decisions
      and public policy, including issues raised by constraints imposed by scarcity, how economies and
      markets work, and the benefits and costs of economic interaction and interdependence. Such literacy
      includes analysis, reasoning, problem solving, and decision making that helps people function as
      consumers, producers, savers, investors, and responsible citizens.
      Students who meet the expectations will understand how economies function and how to apply the
      concepts and principles of economics to their lives as individuals and as citizens. Understanding and
      applying these concepts and principles should help students make sense of daily events and enable
      them to analyze, investigate, and develop reasoned thinking about economic challenges and public
      policies. To cite the “Goals 2000: Educate America Act” of 1994, the study of economics (among other
      subjects) should ensure that students learn to “use their minds well, so they may be prepared for
      responsible citizenship, further learning, and productive employment in our Nation’s modern economy.”
      The economics content is necessary for the understanding and the analysis of a wide variety of
      applications, including those involving individual and household choices, personal finance issues,
      business and entrepreneurial decisions, and public policy. Students analyze and study economic
      concepts and principles in three contextual areas: the individual and household context; a business
      context; and a government or public context. Their study is focused around four content areas: the
      Market Economy; the National Economy; the International Economy; and Personal Finance.
      Content in the Market Economy includes much of what is traditionally described as microeconomics.
      The core content focuses on the importance of scarcity and limited resources; the roles of economic
      institutions, such as legal systems, corporations, and labor unions in the market economy; the
      influence of prices and supplies on the interaction of buyers and sellers; and trade-offs and incentives
      in people’s behavior.
      Content in the National Economy includes much of what is traditionally described as macroeconomics.
      The National Economy content area includes the concepts, terminology, and data used to identify
      and describe inflation, unemployment, output, and growth; the factors that cause changes in
      those conditions; the role of money and interest rates in an economy; and the mechanics and the
      appropriate uses of Federal Reserve monetary policies and federal government fiscal policies.
      Content in the International Economy includes the reasons for individuals and businesses to specialize
      and trade; the rationale for specialization and trade across international borders; and the comparison
      of the benefits and costs of that specialization and resulting trade for consumers, producers, and
      governments.
      Content in Personal Finance includes the role of economic concepts in understanding personal finance
      issues and in creating personal finance strategies.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		           		                  MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                       137

USING THE ECONOMICS HSCE: THINGS TO REMEMBER
There are a number of important considerations for teachers to keep in mind as they use these Economics
expectations to plan instruction. It is important to remember that the expectation content described in this
document:

USES ECONOMICS THINKING
All of the expectations require students to think – analyze, synthesize, evaluate, compare, contrast, argue –
using economics habits of mind. In meeting the expectations, students will use such thinking to analyze and
interpret information in developing their understanding. These expectations are not intended to stress memory
over meaning, or coverage over understanding. While knowledge of names and definitions is essential for
economics study, high-quality teaching and learning demand a great deal more than just the mastery of discrete
collections of facts or terms.

REQUIRES ACTIVE ECONOMIC INQUIRY
In using economics concepts and habits of mind, students should engage in active, disciplined inquiry, analysis,
and argumentation. Learning involves purposeful investigations within a community that has established
goals, standards, criteria, and procedures for study. It entails learning how to read, write, and use economics
to understand and participate in the world around us. This calls upon students to frame important economic
problems and questions; to locate and analyze appropriate evidence and data; and to apply economic concepts
and principles to build reasoned and evidenced-based interpretations, arguments, or decisions. In short,
economics should provide Michigan students with the kind of reason and informed decision making that will
enable them to function effectively both in their personal lives and as citizens and participants in an increasingly
connected world economy.

REPRESENTS CONTENT EXPECTATIONS AND NOT PEDAGOGICAL ORGANIZATION
This document lists content expectations for students. It does not establish suggested organization for teaching
or learning this content. For example, this document is not presenting expectations in a suggested instructional
sequence. The expectations do not represent single lessons, a day’s worth of instruction, or even a unit.
Michigan teachers and curriculum coordinators can combine expectations to structure meaningful learning
experiences for their students. For example, a teacher could use a compelling economic issue or problem to
organize weeks of study, while coherently employing many content expectations.

DIFFERENTIATES BETWEEN REQUIRED AND SUGGESTED CONTENT
On numerous occasions, the expectations will include examples to help clarify teachable content. These specific
examples are suggestions. Educators may use other examples to meet the expectations or to guide instruction
and the creation of local curriculum and resources. The examples are not required content but may appear in
a prompt of an assessment question; however, the focus of a state summative assessment question will be the
language and content of the expectation itself.

Process and Skills
The Social Studies Process and Skills for High School are repeated in each of the course/credit standards.
138
                                                          ECONOMICS


      The Market Economy                                                                         • Individual, Business, and
                                                                                                   Government Choices
      •   Relevance of limited resources.                             E1: The Market
                                                                                                 • Competitive Markets
      •   How individuals and institutions make and evaluate          Economy
                                                                                                 • Prices, Supply, and
          decisions.                                                                               Demand
      •   The role of incentives.                                                                • Role of Government
      •   How buyers and sellers interact to create markets.
      •   How these markets allocate resources.
      •   The economic role of government in a market
          economy.
      •   Evaluation of short-run and long-run decisions.                                        • Understanding National
                                                                      E2: The National
      •   The comparison of benefits and costs when making                                         Markets
                                                                      Economy
          a decision.                                                                            • Role of Government in
      •   The role of entrepreneurs.                                                               the U.S. Economy
      •   Concepts – scarcity, choice, opportunity costs,
          supply and demand, profit, competition, incentives,
          individual incomes, marginal analysis, markets,
          market structures, elasticity, property rights, market
          and government failure.
                                                                      E3: The                    • Economic Systems
      The National Economy                                            International              • Economic
                                                                      Economy                      Interdependence – Trade
      •   The data that describe the overall conditions in the
          U.S. economy.
      •   The factors that cause changes in those conditions.
      •   The role of money and interest rates in an economy.
      •   The mechanics and appropriate use of Federal
          Reserve monetary and federal government fiscal
          policies.
                                                                      E4: Personal               • Decision Making
      •   How economies use different systems of allocating
                                                                      Finance
          goods and services and comparison of the benefits
          and costs of different methods.
      •   The ways in which governments generate revenue
          and use it to supply goods and services.
      •   The consequences of tax and spending policies to
          achieve macroeconomic goals.
      •   Concepts – unemployment, inflation, output,
          economic growth, money, gross domestic product
          (GDP), interest rates.
      The International Economy
      •   Reasons for individuals and businesses to specialize        Economics Knowledge
          and trade, and the rationale for specialization and
          trade across international borders.                         •   Understand the fundamental constraints
      •   Comparison of the benefits and costs of                         imposed by limited resources, the resulting
          specialization and resulting trade for consumers,               choices people have to make, and the
          producers, and governments.                                     trade-offs they face.
      •   Understanding that trade brings additional
          complications.
                                                                      •   Understand how economies and markets
      •   Benefit and cost comparison of policies that alter              work and how people function within them.
          trade barriers between nations.                             •   Understand the benefits and costs of
      •   The processes and consequences of exchange rate                 economic interaction and interdependence
          determination.                                                  among people and nations.
      •   Concepts – voluntary exchange, specialization,
          interdependence, comparative advantage, imports             Intellectual Skills
          and exports, and barriers to trade (tariffs, quotas).
                                                                      •   Economic reasoning.
      Personal Finance
                                                                      •   Problem solving.
      •   Concepts: earning income, buying goods and                  •   Decision making.
          services, saving, using credit, financial investing,
                                                                      •   Analyzing real-life situations.
          protecting and insuring.
      Adapted from Economics Framework for the 2006 NAEP              Components of Economics Literacy
                                                                      •   The ability to identify, analyze, and evaluate
                                                                          the consequences of individual decisions
                                                                          and public policy.



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                       		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                 139

 GENERAL SOCIAL SCIENCE KNOWLEDGE, PROCESSES, AND SKILLS
       P1       Reading and Communication
       P2       Inquiry, Research, and Analysis
       P3       Public Discourse and Decision Making
       P4       Civic Participation

 ECONOMICS SECONDARY CONTENT STATEMENT OUTLINE
 E1 – THE MARKET ECONOMY
       1.1      Individual and Business Decision Making
       1.2      Competitive Markets
       1.3      Prices, Supply, and Demand
       1.4      Government Impact on Households and Businesses

 E2 – THE NATIONAL ECONOMY
       2.1      Economic indicators in the Economy
       2.2      Role of Government in the U.S. Economy
 E3 – THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY
       3.1      Economic Systems
       3.2      Economic Interdependence – Trade

 E4 – PERSONAL FINANCE
       4.1      Decision Making




                       Sample Economics Compelling and Supporting Question
   HS        Do taxes help   1) In what ways does the government of the United States collect taxes, and how
ECONOMICS     or hurt U.S.   is that money spent?
                citizens?    2) What are the seven different income tax brackets and four categories that U.S.
                             citizens must file under with the United States Internal Revenue Service?
                             3) How do taxes affect people from different socio-economic backgrounds?


                             Standards Connection: 1.4.3, 1.4.4, 4.1.1
140

                                               ECONOMICS


      E1 The Market Economy
      1.1     Individual, Business, and Government Decision Making
       Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to explain
      and demonstrate how individuals confront scarcity, and how market forces influence how
      they organize, produce, use, and allocate resources in its presence.
            1.1.1 Scarcity, Choice, Opportunity Costs, Incentives – using examples, explain
            how scarcity, choice, opportunity costs, and incentives affect decisions made by
            households, businesses, and governments.
            1.1.2 Entrepreneurship – analyze the risks and rewards of entrepreneurship and
            associate the functions of entrepreneurs with alleviating problems associated with
            scarcity.
            1.1.3 Marginal Analysis – weigh marginal benefits and marginal costs in decision
            making.
      1.2     Competitive Markets
       Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to analyze
      how the functions and constraints of business structures, the role of price in the market,
      and relationships of investment to productivity and growth, impact competitive markets.
            1.2.1 Institutions – describe the roles of various economic institutions and purpos-
            es they serve in a market economy.
            Examples may include but are not limited to: banks, labor unions, markets,
            corporations, co-operatives, sole proprietorships, partnerships, and not-for-profit
            organizations.
            1.2.2 Market Structures – identify the characteristics of perfect competition,mo-
            nopolistic competition, oligopoly, and monopoly market structures.
            Examples may include but are not limited to: number of producers, similarity of
            products, barriers to entry, control over prices.
      1.3     Prices, Supply, and Demand
       Compare how supply, demand, price, equilibrium, elasticity, and incentives affect the
      workings of a market.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		       		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                              141
      1.3.1 Supply And Demand – use the laws of supply and demand to explain house-
      hold and business behavior.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: determinants of demand and de-
      terminants of supply.
      1.3.2 Price, Equilibrium, Elasticity, and Incentives – analyze how prices change
      through the interaction of buyers and sellers in a market, including the role of sup-
      ply, demand, equilibrium, and elasticity, and explain how incentives (monetary and
      non-monetary) affect choices of households and economic organizations.
1.4     Role of Government in the Market
  Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to describe
the varied ways in which government impacts households and businesses through policy
decisions, regulatory laws, and ordinances, as well as apply key economic elements to
how governments and markets allocate resources differently and explain why these dif-
ferences matter in terms of growth and prosperity across the mass population.
      1.4.1 Public Policy and the Market – analyze the impact of a change in public policy
      on consumers, producers, workers, savers, and investors.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: an increase in the minimum
      wage, a new tax policy, a change in interest rates, or price controls on the quantity
      of a good or service.
      1.4.2 Government and Consumers – analyze the role of government in protecting
      consumers and enforcing contracts (including property rights), and explain how this
      role influences the incentives (or disincentives) for people to produce and exchange
      goods and services.
      1.4.3 Government Revenue and Services – analyze the ways in which local and
      state governments generate revenue and use that revenue to supply public services.
      1.4.4 Market Failure – explain the role for government in addressing both negative
      and positive externalities.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: pollution, vaccinations, education,
      medical research, government/private partnerships.
      1.4.5 Consequences of Governmental Policy – assess the incentives for political
      leaders to implement policies that disperse costs widely over large groups of people
      and benefit small and politically powerful groups.
      Examples may include but are not limited to: subsidies, tariffs, import quotas.
      1.4.6 Price Controls – analyze the impact of price ceilings and price floors on the
      quantity of a good or service supplied and demanded in a market.
142
      E2 The National Economy of the United States of America
      2.1 Understanding National Markets
        Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to explain why
      inflation, unemployment, output, and growth in potential output matter to consumers and
      producers, as well as associate stable money and interest rates with economic prosperity.
         2.1.1 Circular Flow and the National Economy – using the concept of circular flow,
         analyze the roles of and relationship between households, business firms, and gov-
         ernment in the economy of the United States.
         2.1.2 Economic Indicators – using a number of indicators, such as gross domestic
         product (GDP), per capita GDP, unemployment rates, and consumer price index, ana-
         lyze the current and future state of an economy.
      2.2 Role of Government in the U.S. Economy
       Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to analyze
      the role of government in the economy of the United States by identifying macroeco-
      nomic goals, comparing perspectives on government roles, analyzing fiscal and mone-
      tary policy, assessing the protective role of government, and describing the role of gov-
      ernment as a producer and consumer of public goods and services. Students will also
      analyze how governmental decisions on taxation, spending, protections, and regulations
      impact macroeconomic goals.
         2.2.1 Government Involvement in the Economy – evaluate the three macroeco-
         nomic goals of an economic system (stable prices, low unemployment, and economic
         growth).
         2.2.2 Government Revenue and Services – evaluate the ways in which the feder-
         al government generates revenue on consumption, income, and wealth, and uses
         that revenue to supply government services and public goods, and protect property
         rights.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: parks and highways, national de-
         fense, social security, Medicaid, Medicare.
         2.2.3 Fiscal Policy and its Consequences – analyze the consequences (intended
         and unintended) of using various tax and spending policies to achieve macroeconom-
         ic goals of stable prices, low unemployment, and economic growth.
         2.2.4 Federal Reserve and Monetary Policy – explain the roles and responsibilities
         of the Federal Reserve system and compare and contrast the consequences (intend-
         ed and unintended) of different monetary policy actions of the Federal Reserve Board
         as a means to achieve macroeconomic goals of stable prices, low unemployment,
         and economic growth.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		     		               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                            143
E3 The International Economy
3.1 Economic Systems
 Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to explain
how different economic systems, including free market, command, and mixed systems,
coordinate and facilitate the exchange, production, distribution, and consumption of
goods and services.
   3.1.1 Developing Nations – assess how factors such as availability of natural re-
   sources, investments in human and physical capital, technical assistance, public
   attitudes and beliefs, property rights, and free trade can affect economic growth in
   developing nations.
   3.1.2 International Organizations and the World Economy – evaluate the diverse
   impact of trade policies of the World Trade Organization, World Bank, or International
   Monetary Fund on developing economies of Africa, Central America, or Asia, and on
   the developed economies of the United States and Western Europe.
   3.1.3 Comparing Economic Systems – compare and contrast the characteristics,
   advantages, and disadvantages of traditional, command, market, and mixed eco-
   nomic systems.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: GDP, inflation, unemployment.
   3.1.4 Impact of Transitional Economies – analyze the impact of transitional econ-
   omies, such as in China and India, on the global economy in general and the Ameri-
   can economy in particular.
3.2 Economic Interdependence – Trade
 Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to describe
how trade generates economic development and interdependence, and analyze the ben-
efits and costs for individuals, producers, and governments.
   3.2.1 Absolute and Comparative Advantage – use the concepts of absolute and
   comparative advantages to explain why goods and services are produced in one na-
   tion or locale versus another.
   3.2.2 Domestic Activity and World Trade – assess the impact of trade policies,
   monetary policy, exchange rates, and interest rates on domestic activity and world
   trade.
   Examples may include but are not limited to: tariffs, quotas, export subsidies,
   product standards, other barriers.
   3.2.3 Exchange Rate and World Trade – analyze the effects on trade from a change
   in an exchange rate between two currencies.
   3.2.4 The Global Economy and the Marketplace – analyze and describe how the
   global economy has changed the interaction of buyers and sellers.
144
      E4 Personal Finance
      4.1 Decision Making
       Individually and collaboratively, students will engage in planned inquiries to describe
      and demonstrate how the economic forces of scarcity and opportunity costs impact indi-
      vidual and household choices.
         4.1.1 Earning Income – conduct research regarding potential income and employ-
         ee benefit packages, non-income factors that may influence career choice, benefits
         and costs of obtaining the necessary education or technical skills, taxes a person is
         likely to pay, and other possible sources of income.
         Examples may include but are not limited to: interest, dividends, capital appre-
         ciation, income support from the government, social security.
         4.1.2 Buying Goods And Services – describe the factors that consumers may con-
         sider when purchasing a good or service, including the costs, benefits, and the role
         of government in obtaining the information.
         4.1.3 Saving – identify the incentives people have to set aside income for future
         consumption, and evaluate the impact of time, interest rates, and inflation upon the
         value of savings.
         4.1.4 Using Credit – evaluate the benefits, costs, and potential impacts of using
         credit to purchase goods and services.
         4.1.5 Financial Investing – analyze the risks, expected rate of return, tax benefits,
         impact of inflation, role of government agencies, and importance of diversification
         when investing in financial assets.
         4.1.6 Protecting and Insuring – assess the financial risk of lost income, assets,
         health, or identity, and determine if a person should accept the risk exposure, reduce
         risk, or transfer the risk to others by paying a fee now to avoid the possibility of a
         larger loss later.




  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		    		              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
                                                                                                                           145

            THE MICHIGAN K-12 SOCIAL STUDIES STANDARDS



WRITERS/REVIEWERS                       2015 FOCUS GROUP                         Mr. Michael Warren, Oakland Circuit
                                        MEMBERS                                  Court Judge, General Civil/Criminal
CHAIRMAN: Mr. Jim Cameron,
                                                                                 Division, Oakland County Courthouse,
Consultant, Michigan Department of      Mr. Ken Bradstreet, Government           Court Room 5B
Education                               Affairs Consultant
                                        Wolverine Power Cooperative              Senator Patrick Colbeck
MEMBERS:
                                                                                 Michigan Senate District 7
Dr. Gordon Andrews, Michigan Council    Ms. Isra El-beshir, Education & Public
for History Education                   Programming Curator
Grand Valley State University           Arab American National Museum            2018 TASK FORCE MEMBERS
Ms. Carol Bacak-Egbo, Consultant        Mr. Chad Folkersma, Teacher              K-4 Task Force:
Waterford School District               Sault Area High School & Career
                                        Center                                   Chairs: Carol Egbo, Stan Masters
Ms. Rebecca Bush, Social Studies
                                        Ms. Tina Frazier, Teacher                Robin Barney-Lees, Retired Social
Consultant, Instructional Services,
                                        Edison Elementary School                 Studies Teacher
Ottawa Area ISD
                                        Ms. Cindy Gilsenan, American History     Amy Bradfield, Education Program
Mr. Derek D’Angelo, President & Chief
                                        Teacher, Lakeview High School            Manager, Historical Society of
Academic Officer
                                                                                 Michigan
Michigan Council on Economic            Mr. Marius Guseth, Teacher
Education                               Old Redford Academy Prep. High           Angeline Brown, Teacher, Gaylord
                                        School                                   Community Schools
Mr. David Hales, S.S. Consultant
Wayne RESA                              Ms. Elspeth Inglis, Assistant Director   Jannan Cotto, Michigan Tribal
                                        for Educational Services                 Education Directors
Mr. Tom Hinken, Social Studies
Consultant, Muskegon Area               Kalamazoo Valley Museum                  Frank Hamet, School Board Member,
Intermediate School District.           Mr. David Kallman, Attorney              Flatrock Community Schools
Mr. David A. Johnson, Instructional     Kallman Legal Group                      Kathryn Holmes-Gonzales,
Consultant Social Studies and Special   Ms. Erin Mersino                         Instructional Coach, Saginaw Public
Projects                                Thomas More Law Center                   Schools
Wexford-Missaukee ISD and Northern                                               Jill Larkins, School Administrator,
Michigan Learning Consortium            Mr. Ron Miller, Principal
                                        St. Clair High School                    Hamtramck Public Schools
Mr. David Klemm, Social Studies &                                                Zemen Marrugi, Teacher –
Special Projects Consultant             Ms. Melissa Montoya, Interim
                                        Education Director,                      Instructional Coach, Flagship
Muskegon Area ISD                                                                Academy and Warrendale Academy
                                        Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe
Mr. Scott Koenig, Social Studies                                                 Brett Meteyer, Teacher, Williamston
Consultant, Office of Standards and     Mr. James Muffett
                                        Student Statesmanship Institute and      Community Schools
Assessment, Michigan Department of
Education                               Citizens for Traditional Values          Shelika Tate, Western Michigan
                                        Ms. Donna Odom, Executive Director       University, Cooley Law School
Dr. Michael Libbee, Michigan
Geographic Alliance Director            The Southwest Michigan Black             Amanda Weinert, Curriculum
Central Michigan University             Heritage Society                         Specialist, Little Traverse Bay Band of
                                        Mr. Andrew Sias, World History           Odawa Indians
Mr. Stan Masters, Coordinator of
Instructional Data Services             Teacher, Kingsley Middle School          Susan Welch, Teacher, Fenton Area
Lenawee ISD                             Mr. Todd Simmons, Principal              Public Schools
Dr. Tamara Shreiner, Michigan Council   Pewamo-Westphalia Middle/High            Annie Whitlock, Professor, University
for History Education, Grand Valley     School                                   of Michigan, Flint
State University                        Mr. Lincoln Stocks, President
Mr. Roy Sovis, Instruction              East Detroit Federation of Teachers
                                                                                 U.S. History Task Force:
Coordinator, Erwin L. Davis Education   Dr. Joseph Stoltman, Professor
Center, Genesee ISD                     Department of Geography,                 Chairs: Rebecca Bush, David A.
                                        Western Michigan University              Johnson
Ms. Linda Start, Executive Director,
Retired                                 Ms. Chasity Sutton                       Mike Donovan, Teacher, Godfrey Lee
Michigan Center for Civic Education     Eastern Upper Peninsula ISD              Public Schools

Ms. Ellen Zwarensteyn, Executive        Dr. Karen Thomas-Brown,                  Eric Hemenway, Little Traverse Bay
Director                                Social Studies Associate Professor       Band of Odawa Indians
Michigan Center for Civic Education     School of Education, University of       Tamika Henry, Principal, Allendale
                                        Michigan - Dearborn                      Public Schools
                                                                                 Andrew Irons, Student
146
      Allyson Klak, Teacher, Shepherd Public      Consultant, Macomb ISD                     Seth Baker, Teacher, Brimley Area
      Schools                                                                                Schools
                                                  Ed McGovern, Teacher, Wayne-Westland
      Cormac Lynn, Superintendent,                Community Schools                          John Damoose, Student
      Nouvel Catholic Central Schools,
                                                  Judy Pamp, Assistant Director and          Margo Damoose, Parent
      Saginaw
                                                  Educational Director, Zibiwing Center
                                                                                             David Dieterle, Walsh College
      Richard Matrella, Teacher, Bessemer
                                                  Pudmaja Rao, South Asian American
      Schools
                                                  Voices for Impact
      Sean O’Neill, Professor, Grand Valley                                                  Kathryn Gustafson, Teacher, Farmington
                                                  Dr. Joe Stoltman, Professor, Western
      State University                                                                       Public Schools
                                                  Michigan University
      Shelia Richardson, Parent                                                              Rania Hammoud, Administrator,
                                                  Ben Washburn, Principal, Detroit Civil
                                                                                             Plymouth Canton Community Schools
      Spencer Richardson, Student                 Service Commission, Parent
                                                                                             Rita Lockridge, Retired Social Studies
      Evan Rokicki, Teacher, Troy Public
                                                                                             Teacher, Detroit Public Schools
      Schools
                                                  High School Civics Task Force:
                                                                                             Miranda Maclean, Teacher, Cheboygan
      Carrie Rowan, Retired Teacher
                                                  Chairs: Tom Hinken, Ellen Zwarensteyn      Public Schools
      Adam Spina, Superintendent,
                                                  Hillary Baker, School Administrator,       Shayma Mustafa, Professor, Wayne
      Williamston Schools
                                                  Allegan Public Schools                     State University
      Erika Sponsler, Teacher, Western School
                                                  Thomas Berriman, School                    Chris Norton, Teacher, Chandler Park
      District
                                                  Administrator, Alpena Public Schools       Academy
      Dustin Webb, Teacher, Lake City Area
                                                  Rachel Clark, State of Michigan            Tracy Ripley, Teacher, New Buffalo Area
      Schools
                                                                                             Schools
                                                  Jennifer Crotty, Teacher, Fitzgerald
                                                  Public Schools                             Grace Tesfae, Teacher, Cesar Chavez
      World History And Geography Task                                                       Academy
                                                  Allison Echlin, Teacher / Parent,
      Force:
                                                  Northville Public Schools                  Marsha Turner, ELA Consultant, Ionia
      Chairs: Dr. Michael Libbee, Dr. Tamara                                                 Public Schools
                                                  Barbara Gazda, Teacher, Hartland High
      Shreiner
                                                  School
      Dr. Jared Aumen, Teacher, Scarlett
                                                  David Harris, Retired Professor,           Bias Review Task Force:
      Middle School
                                                  University of Michigan
                                                                                             Chairs: Melissa Kieswetter, Marsha
      Robert Behnke, Superintendent, Adrian
                                                  Adam Horos, Teacher, East Grand            Lewis
      Public Schools
                                                  Rapids Public Schools
                                                                                             Asim Alavi
      Cindy Bloom, Teacher, Comstock Middle
                                                  Roland Hwang, School Board Member,
      School                                                                                 Joshua Archer, High School Student
                                                  Northville Public Schools
      Robin Bott, Teacher, Northeast Middle                                                  Francisca Garcia
                                                  David A. Johnson, Retired Educator /
      School                                                                                 Rania Hammoud, Curriculum
                                                  Pre-service teacher Educator
      Alaina Brown, Teacher, Novi Public                                                     Coordinator
                                                  Sam Jones-Darling, Student, Eastern
      Schools                                                                                Melissa Isaac, Teacher
                                                  Michigan University
      Lisa Childers, Teacher, Fraser Public                                                  Angela Justice, Teacher
                                                  Cortney Kosmala Jackson, Teacher,
      Schools
                                                  Cesar Chavez Academy High School           Calvin Kennebrew, Jr.
      David Copedge, NAACP
                                                  Sam Lowry, Student, Black River Public     Guillermo Martinez
      Brandon Crimmins, Student                   Schools
                                                                                             Pamela McGhee, Teacher
      Dr. Dave Eaton, Professor, Grand Valley     Sara Luther, Teacher, West Ottawa
      State University                            Public Schools                             Mursalata Muhammad, College
                                                                                             Professor
      Anthony Francis, Oakland University         Lacey O’Donnell Teacher, Calumet
                                                  Public Schools                             Charles Penn, Teacher
      Maria Gonzalez, Teacher, Holy Family
      School                                      Maggie Parrish, Teacher, Comstock Park     Destine Price, College Student
                                                  Public Schools                             Padmaja Rao
      Matthew Grandstaff, Teacher, Ovid-Elsie
      Public Schools                              Eric Walcott, Community Member,            Karen Twomey
                                                  Michigan State University Extension
      Emma Haygood, Curriculum Coach,                                                        Pavan Vangipuran
                                                  Specialist
      Berrien Springs Public Schools
                                                  Michael Warren, Oakland Judge / Parent     Mavis Weddington
      Heather Hopkins, Teacher, Sault Area
      Middle School                                                                          LaDonna White, Teacher

      Jennifer Jacobs, Teacher, Detroit           High School Economics Task Force:
      Innovation Academy
                                                  Chairs: Derek D’Angelo, David Hales,
      Alicia Kubacki, Instructional Consultant,   Roy Sovis
      BA-ISD Instructional Consultant for SS
                                                  Chanda Aves, Teacher, Ionia Public
      Sean McBrady, Social Studies                Schools



  Michigan K-12 Social Studies Standards		                      		                       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
          Michigan
        State Board
        of Education
         Dr. Casandra E. Ulbrich
                President
             Rochester Hills

            Dr. Pamela Pugh
             Vice President
                Saginaw

            Michelle Fecteau
               Secretary
                Detroit

             Tiffany Tilley
            NASBE Delegate
              Southfield

             Tom McMillin
               Treasurer
           Oakland Township

           Dr. Judith Pritchett
          Washington Township

         Lupe Ramos-Montigny
             Grand Rapids

              Nikki Snyder
                 Dexter

         Gov. Gretchen Whitmer
               Ex Officio

        Dr. Michael F. Rice, Ph.D.
State Superintendent of Public Instruction



           MDE Staff
       Venessa A. Keesler, Ph.D.
    Deputy Superintendent, Educator,
     Student, and School Supports

          Paula Daniels, Ed.D.
                 Director
     Office of Educational Supports

 Michigan Department of Education
   Office of Educational Supports
         p: (517) 241-3147
 website: www.michigan.gov/mde
