                 GRADE LEVEL CONTENT EXPECTATIONS
SOCIAL STUDIES




                        GRADES K - 8

                               V. 12/07
Welcome to Michigan’s Grade Level Content Expectations for Social Studies
The purpose of social studies instruction is to develop social understanding and civic efficacy.The Grade Level
Content Expectations (GLCE) balance disciplinary content and processes and skills that contribute to
responsible citizenship and form a foundation for high school social studies coursework.
The disciplinary knowledge found in this document can be used by students to construct meaning through
understanding of powerful ideas drawn from the disciplines of history, geography, civics and government, and
economics.These ideas can be best supported by assessment and instruction that focuses on the Standards for
Assessment and the Standards for Teaching and Learning found in the Michigan Curriculum Framework.
Effective social studies instruction and assessment incorporate methods of inquiry, involve public discourse and
decision making, and provide opportunities for citizen involvement. Each year, students should receive instruction
that allows them to think and act as historians, geographers, political scientists, and economists. For this type of
thinking to occur, teachers should utilize the following disciplinary processes with their students:
    • acquiring, organizing, and presenting social studies information
    • conducting investigations on social studies questions
    • analyzing public issues in our various communities
    • engaging in constructive conversation around social studies topics
    • composing cohesive essays expressing a position on public issues
    • participating constructively as community members
Respect for the underlying values of a democratic society is developed through effective social studies education.
Rigorous standards provide a framework for designing curriculum, assessment, and effective classroom instruction,
that result in relevant learning experiences.
These content expectations provide the necessary framework for deliberate professional development. Working
collaboratively, teachers, administrators, university personnel, government officials, parents, community
organizations, and businesses will prepare Michigan students to become productive 21st century citizens.

The K-8 Social Studies GLCE were developed to meet the following criteria:
Rigor
 • challenging enough to equip students to succeed at the next grade level
 • represent the essential core content of a discipline – its key concepts and how they relate to each other
Clarity
 • more than just plain and jargon-free prose
 • widely understood and accepted by teachers, parents, school boards, and others who have a stake in the
   quality of schooling
 • provide guidance for university faculties who will prepare teachers to convey the expectations, and who
   later receive those teachers’ students
Specificity
 • enough detail to guide districts in developing curricula and teachers in planning instruction
 • address available time for instruction
Focus
 • prioritize facts, concepts, and skills that should be emphasized at each grade level
Progression
 • move from simple to complex, from concrete to abstract
 • delineate a progression of knowledge and skills, rather than repetition from grade to grade
Coherence
 • reflect a coherent structure of the discipline and/or reveal significant relationships among the strands, and
   how the study of one complements the study of another
 • represent a “back-mapping” from the high school expectations to a progression of benchmarks that middle and
   elementary school students would need to reach in order to be “on track” for success in college and work


         GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS          V. 12/07    MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
The Challenges of Developing Content Expectations in Social Studies
At the national level and in just about every state, establishing standards and benchmarks in the social studies has been a challenging
endeavor, filled with political and pedagogical controversy. Three enduring educational issues have challenged the creation of
standards/content expectations to guide instruction and assessment in Michigan: (1) The challenge of integrating separate disciplines,
(2)The challenge of representing both thinking and substance, and (3) The challenge of determining an effective K-12 scope and
sequence.
First, while everyone recognizes that social studies is an amalgam of four or more disciplines including history, civics, economics
and geography, there is no consensus concerning the appropriate mix of these or the appropriate place of each in the curriculum.
Critical questions about the relationship among the content areas or even the relative amount of each area in the standards and
eventually in the curriculum have not been resolved. Therefore, one critical challenge is to find ways to make connections within
and across content areas.
Second, social studies educators face a problem in trying to reflect both disciplinary “thinking” and “substance” in standards
documents. This is particularly true in history and civics where people want students to develop more sophisticated ways to think
about contemporary issues and to draw upon specific knowledge of the past and the present in their thinking. So, standards and
content expectations must include both thinking and knowledge expectations in such a combination that can effectively guide
teachers, curriculum designers, and, of course, assessors.
When standards documents stress “thinking” at the expense of “substance,” teachers and educational critics often argue these
appear vague and offer little guidance for deciding what content should be taught and tested. Teachers often complain that the
mandated tests assess content not specified in standards or benchmarks.
On the other hand, standards that specify more substantive detail face their own critics who argue that such detail is too prescriptive
and gives too much content to be effectively assessed in large-scale, multiple-choice dominated exams. A second challenge, therefore,
is to provide more substance to meet the criticism that Michigan’s standards were too vague without losing sight of the central
purposes for offering social studies to our students.
Finally, there is the challenge of creating a sensible and educationally sound K-12 scope and sequence. For many years, states required
the full run of U.S. history in grades 5, 8 and 11. Critics argued this privileged breadth over depth, and urged dividing historical
content into three sections for students to study in more depth in 5th, 8th and 11th grades. Still others argued that this arrangement
was asking very young students(e.g., 5th graders) to study, remember, and be able to use very sophisticated concepts and events five
or six years later when they were studying U.S. history in high school. Most advanced courses rely upon earlier grades to develop
foundational skills and knowledge, but do not expect earlier grades to help students achieve the sophisticated study possible in
high school. Thus they begin their studies of U.S. history at the “beginning.” In short, social studies educators have developed three
different and compelling patterns for structuring the scope and sequence in social studies.
The standards and expectations that follow represent the best efforts of the various writing and review committees to provide
the integration, coherence, and the scope and sequence that will guide instruction and assessment in Michigan.




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                    V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                    
DESIGNING AN ALIGNED CURRICULUM
This document is intended to support dialogue at the school and district level that results in rigorous and relevant
curriculum that will prepare students for college and the workplace.
As stakeholders (e.g., teachers, administrators, school board members, parents, community members, students, local legislative
representatives) work with these standards, they should consider the following questions:
    • How are these content standards and expectations reflected in our curriculum and instruction already?
    • Where may the curriculum and instruction be strengthened to more fully realize the intent of these standards
      and expectations?
    • What opportunities do these standards and expectations present to develop new and strengthen existing
      curriculum, leading to instructional excellence?
    • How might the standards and expectations be implemented as we take into account what we know about our
      students, school, and community?
    • How might the effectiveness with which our students and schools are meeting the standards and content
      expectations be assessed?
    • How might school-based assessments (e.g., student portfolios, school-based writing assessments, teacher or
      classroom research, district-level assessments) be used to make data-driven decisions about teaching and learning?
Through dialogue about questions such as these, and building upon the multitude of existing strengths in our
current high schools, voices of all stakeholders will participate in the important and continuing process of shaping
instructional excellence in Michigan schools and preparing students for college and the workplace.
In 2002, the Michigan State Board of Education adopted the Policy on Learning Expectations.These Expectations and
the High School Content Expectations are intended to work together to prepare Michigan’s students to face new
challenges in an ever-changing world, and provide them with the knowledge and skills needed for future success and
to be productive citizens. Students will be prepared to:
  • Gather Information                                   • Think and Communicate Critically
  • Understand Information                               • Learn and Consider Issues Collaboratively
  • Analyze Issues                                       • Learn Independently
  • Draw and Justify Conclusions                         • Create Knowledge
  • Organize and Communicate Information                 • Act Ethically

THE GOALS OF SOCIAL STUDIES
Social Studies is the integrated study of the social sciences to prepare young people to become responsible citizens.
Responsible citizens display social understanding and civic efficacy. Social understanding includes knowledge of the human
condition, how it has changed over time, the variations that occur in different physical environments and cultural settings,
and the emerging trends that appear likely to shape the future in an interdependent world. Civic efficacy is the readiness
and willingness to assume responsibilities of citizenship, knowing how, when, and where to make informed and reasoned
decisions for the public good in a pluralistic, democratic society.




         Michigan Social Studies                                                            2ESPONSIBLE #ITIZENSHIP

         Curriculum Framework
                                                                                                                        0ARTICIPATION
                                                                                                           $EMOCRATIC
                                                                             $ISCIPLINARY
                                                                             +NOWLEDGE


                                                                                                4HINKING




                                                                                                                          #ITIZEN
                                                                                                             6ALUES
                                                                                                 3KILLS




                                                                                        (ISTORY               'EOGRAPHY
                                                                                        #IVICS                %CONOMICS



         GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07               MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
ACTIVE RESPONSIBLE CITIZENS
Our constitutional democracy requires active citizens. Responsible citizenship requires students to participate
actively while learning in the classroom. Instruction should provide activities that actively engage students so that
they simultaneously learn about civic participation while involved in the civic life of their communities, our state,
and our nation.The social studies curriculum prepares students to participate in political activities, to serve their
communities, and to regulate themselves responsibly.

The Responsible Citizen
 • Uses knowledge of the past to construct meaningful understanding of our diverse cultural heritage and inform
   his/her civic judgments (Historical Perspective)
 • Uses knowledge of spatial patterns on earth to understand processes that shape both the natural environments
   and the diverse societies that inhabit them (Geographic Perspective)
 • Uses knowledge of American government and politics to make decisions about governing his/her community
   (Civic Perspective)
 • Uses knowledge of the production, distribution and consumption of goods and services to make personal,
   career and societal decisions about the use of scarce resources (Economic Perspective)
 • Uses methods of social science investigation to answer questions about society (Inquiry)
 • Knows how, when, and where to construct and express reasoned positions on public issues (Public Discourse
   and Decision Making)
 • Acts constructively to further the public good (Citizen Involvement)


USING SOCIAL STUDIES TO DEVELOP DIGITAL-AGE PROFICIENCIES
The use of technology is critical for responsible citizenship. Citizens must know how to read and comprehend
narratives from a variety of sources, understand and use data effectively, as well as know how to compile and
present valid and reliable data.The development of vocabulary, critical to understanding and communication, is
an important component of the social studies curriculum. Finally writing, especially expository, informational and
persuasive writing, is an empowering skill needed by all citizens.The ability to clearly communicate one’s ideas and
reasoned viewpoints is the hallmark of a responsible citizen.

“The current and future health of America’s 21st Century Economy depends directly on how broadly and deeply Americans
reach a new level of literacy—21st Century Literacy—that includes strong academic skills, thinking, reasoning, teamwork skills,
and proficiency in using technology.” —21st Century Workforce Commission National Alliance of Business

In order to thrive in a digital economy, students will need digital-age proficiencies.These proficiencies include:
  • Basic, scientific, technological, financial, economic, and civic literacy
  • Visual and information literacy
  • Cultural literacy and global awareness
  • Adaptability, ability to manage complexity, and self-direction
  • Curiosity, creativity, and risk-taking
  • Higher order thinking and sound reasoning
  • Teaming and collaboration
  • Personal and social responsibility
  • Interactive communication
  • Prioritizing, planning, and managing for results
  • Effective use of real-world tools
  • High quality results with real-world application


 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                    
    Understanding the Organizational Structure
    The Grade Level Content Expectations for Grades K-8 and the High School Content Expectations for
    Social Studies are organized by discipline and standard using national standards structures as indicated in
    the chart below.

                                                            K-12 Organizational Chart
                           History                                     Geography                   Civics/Government                     Economics
                    National Standards for                         National Geography                  National Civics               National Economics
                     Historical Thinking                                Standards                        Standards               Standards (NAEP Categories)
     H1      The World in Temporal Terms:
             Historical Habits of Mind                         G1 The World in Spatial         C1 Conceptual Foundations         E1 The Market Economy
                                                                  Terms: Geographical             of Civic and Political Life       1.1 Individual, Business,
             1.1 Temporal Thinking                                Habits of Mind
             1.2 Historical Analysis and Interpretation                                            1.1 Nature of Civic Life             and Government
             1.3 Historical Inquiry                               1.1 Spatial Thinking             1.2 Forms of Government              Choices
             1.4 Historical Understanding                         1.2 Geographical Inquiry                                          1.2 Competitive Markets
             1.5 Historical Issues-Analysis and Decision              and Analysis             C Values and Principles of
                 Making                                                                           American Democracy                1.3 Prices, Supply, and
                                                                  1.3 Geographical                                                      Demand
                                                                      Understanding               2.1 Origins
     Themes Representing National Standards (K-4)                                                 2.2 Foundational Values and       1.4 Role of Government
                                                              G Places and Regions                    Principles                E The National Economy
     H      Living and Working Together in Families and         2.1 Physical Characteristics C Structure and Functions
             Communities, Now and Long Ago                           of Place                                                       2.1 Understanding
                                                                                                 of Government                          National Markets
     H      The History of Michigan and the Great               2.2 Human Characteristics
             Lakes Region                                            of Place                    3.1 Structure and Functions        2.2 Role of Government
     H      The History of the United States                                                    3.2 Powers and Limits                  in the United States
                                                              G Physical Systems                3.3 State and Local                    Economy
     H      The History of Peoples from Many                                                         Governments
             Cultures Around the World                           3.1 Physical Processes                                          E International Economy
                                                                 3.2 Ecosystems                  3.4 System of Law and              3.1 Economic Systems
                                                                                                      Laws
                                                              G Human Systems                                                      3.2 Economic
      Eras Representing National Standards (5-12)                                                3.5 The Policy Process
                                                                                                                                        Interdependence –
                                                                 4.1 Cultural Mosaic             3.6 Characteristics of                 Trade
    Global Analysis of             Thematic Analysis of                                               Nation States
    World History Eras             U.S. History Eras 1-9         4.2 Patterns of Human                                           E Personal Finance
    1-8 from three                                                   Settlement               C Relationship of the United         4.1 Decision Making
    pespectives                                                  4.3 Forces of                   States to Other Nations
      • Cross-temporal/Global      U1 Beginnings to 1620             Cooperation and             and World Affairs
                                                                     Conflict
      • Interregional /Comparative U Colonization and                                           4.1 U.S. Foreign Policy
      • Regional                       Settlement                4.4 Economic
                                                                     Interdependence             4.2 International
                                                                                                      Institutions and Affairs
    W1 Beginnings of Human         U  Revolution  and the
                                       New   Nation           G Environment and                 4.3 Conflict and
         Society                                                 Society                              Cooperation Between
                                   U Expansion and              5.1 Humans and the                   and Among Nations
    W Early Civilizations and         Reform
         Cultures and the                                            Environment              C Citizenship in the United
         Emergence of Pastoral     U Civil War and              5.2 Physical and Human          States
         Peoples                       Reconstruction                Systems
                                                                                                 5.1 The Meaning of
    W Classical Traditions,       U The Development of an G Global Issues Past and                 Citizenship
         World Religions,              Industrial, Urban, and    Present
         and Major Empires                                                                       5.2 Becoming a Citizen
                                       Global United States
                                                                 6.1 Global Topic                5.3 Rights
    W Expanding and                                                 Investigation and
         Intensified Hemispheric U7 The Great Depression             Issue Analysis (P2)
                                                                                                 5.4 Responsibilities
         Interactions                  and World War II                                          5.5 Dispositions
    W Emergence of the First U8 Post-World War II
         Global Age                    United States                                          C Citizenship in Action
    W An Age of Global          U9 America in a New                                               6.1 Civic Inquiry and
       Revolutions                  Global Age                                                         Public Discourse (P3)
    W7 Global Crisis and            (P3, P4)                                                       6.2 Participating in Civic
       Achievement                                                                                     Life (P4)
    W8 The Cold War and Its
       Aftermath (P3, P4)


     Social Studies Knowledge, Processes, and Skills
     K1   General Knowledge [College-Readiness]
     P1   Reading and Communication [Close and Critical Reading; Analysis; Interpret Primary and Secondary Sources; Argumentation]
     P   Inquiry, Research, and Analysis [Information Processing; Conducting Investigations; Problem-Solving; Technology Use]
     P   Public Discourse and Decision Making
          P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
          P3.2 Discourse Regarding Public Issues
          P3.3 Persuasive Writing on a Public Issue
     P   Citizen Involvement




           GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                              V. 12/07          MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Understanding Social Studies GLCE Coding
Each Social Studies GLCE is made up of four parts: the grade, the standard category, the standard, and the expectation.


                                                                                                 6 – E2.3.1



                                                                                 ➞




                                                                                                                                                                                                        ➞


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ➞
                                                                                                                                                                     ➞
                                                                         Grade                                                       Standard Category Standard Expectation


K-4 Expectations are organized by discipline and standard category, standard, and expectation.
    Kindergarten Example K – G1.0.2 = Kindergarten, 1st Geography Standard Category, 2nd Expectation
    4th Grade Example 4 – C5.0.3 = Grade 4, 5th Civics Standard Category, 3rd Expectation
    (The “0” is used as a place holder and indicates that K-4 expectations are organized using the standards categories,
    and do not use the standard codes listed in the K-12 organizational chart.)

5th and 8th Grades focus on an integrated study of United States History.The expectations are organized by U.S.
History and Geography (USHG) Era.The code indicates the era, the standard, and the expectation.
    5th Grade Example 5 – U3.2.1 = Grade 5, 3rd USHG Era, 2nd Standard, 1st Expectation

6th and 7th Grades focus on an integrated study of the world.The expectations are organized by discipline and
standard category (or World History and Geography (WHG) Era), standard, and expectation.
    6th Grade Example 6 – E2.3.1 = Grade 6, 2nd Economics Standard Category, 3rd Standard, 1st Expectation
    7th Grade Example 7 – W2.2.4 = Grade 7, 2nd WHG Era, 2nd Standard, 4th Expectation
    A parenthesis at the end of an expectation presents a reference to the National Geography Standards or the civics,
    economics, or history standards that are used in the document (C1, E3, etc., as listed on page 6).The references
    indicate integration of the content.


    SEQUENCE OF STUDY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WORLD HISTORY                         AP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AND GEOGRAPHY                       COURSES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (Eras 4-8)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1 Credit Required                    OTHER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SOCIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U.S. HISTORY                       STUDIES
                                                                                                  INTEGRATED UNITED STATES HISTORY




                                                                                                                                                                                                        INTEGRATED UNITED STATES HISTORY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AND GEOGRAPHY                       ELECTIVES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (Eras 6-9)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1 Credit Required
                                                                                                                                        WESTERN HEMISPHERE STUDIES




                                                                                                                                                                           EASTERN HEMISPHERE STUDIES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CIVICS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .5 Credit Required
                                THE LOCAL COMMUNITY




                                                                         UNITED STATES STUDIES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ECONOMICS
                                                      MICHIGAN STUDIES




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .5 Credit Required
                 FAMILIES AND
    MYSELF AND




                 SCHOOLS
    OTHERS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3 Credits as Required                Electives

      K             1            2                      3                4                         5                                       6                                  7                            8                                                   HIGH SCHOOL

       K-7 Expanding Horizons
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5-12 Disciplinary Focus




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                                                                                                                          V. 12/07                                                          MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                         7
    Using the K- 8 Social Studies GLCE


                  Using the K-8 Social Studies GLCE:Things to Remember
     There are a number of important considerations for teachers to keep in mind as they use Grade Level
     Content Expectations to plan instruction. It is important to remember that this document


            •   Uses historical, spatial, civic, and economic thinking –The expectations require
                students to think – compare, contrast, argue – using social studies concepts and habits of
                mind. The expectations call upon students to use such thinking to analyze and interpret
                information in developing their understanding. These expectations do not intend to stress
                memory over meaning or coverage over understanding. While knowledge of names and
                definitions is essential, high quality teaching and learning demands a great deal more than just
                the mastery of discrete collections of facts or terms.

            •   Requires active, social studies inquiry – In using social studies concepts and habits of
                mind, students should engage in active, disciplined inquiry, analysis, and argumentation. Learning
                involves purposeful investigations within a community that has established goals, standards,
                criteria, and procedures for study. It entails learning how to read, write, and use the social
                studies to understand and participate in the world around us.This calls upon students to frame
                important social studies problems and questions; to locate and analyze appropriate evidence
                and data; and to apply social studies concepts and principles to build reasoned and evidence-
                based interpretations, arguments, or decisions. In short, social studies instruction should
                provide Michigan students with the kind of reasoned and informed decision making that should
                characterize each citizen’s participation in American society.

            •   Represents Content Expectations and not Pedagogical Organization –This
                document lists content expectations for students. It does not establish suggested organization
                for teaching or learning this content. For example, this document is not presenting
                expectations in a suggested instructional sequence.The expectations do not represent
                single lessons, a day’s worth of instruction, or even a unit. Michigan teachers and curriculum
                coordinators can combine expectations to structure meaningful learning experiences for their
                students. For example, a teacher could use a compelling historic, geographic, civic, or economic
                issue or problem to organize weeks of study, while coherently employing many content
                expectations.

            •   Differentiates between required and suggested (e.g.) content – The expectations
                specify teachable content in two different ways. On numerous occasions, the expectations
                will offer examples for teachers to help clarify teachable content. Typically, these examples
                or suggestions appear in parentheses. The document always identifies such optional content
                with an “e.g.” or “for example.” These are simply suggestions and teachable options. Teachers
                may use other examples to meet the expectations. In short, these examples are not required
                content. In other places, the expectations identify specific content that students should study.
                This content is never preceded by “e.g.” or “for example.” Unlike the optional examples, a
                statewide assessment might assess the required content.




8     GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS            V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  K-  Overview


                                     K-5 Grade-Specific Contexts

                                           Using a familiar context for five and six year olds, kindergartners learn about
                                           the social studies disciplines (history, geography, civics and government, and
  Kindergarten       Myself and Others     economics) through the lens of “Myself and Others.” Accordingly, each discipline
                                           focuses on developing rudimentary understandings through an integrated
                                           approach to the field.


                                           In first grade, students continue to explore the social studies disciplines of
                                           history, geography, civics and government, and economics through an integrated
                        Families and
       First                               approach using the context of school and families. This is the students’ first
                          Schools
                                           introduction to social institutions as they draw upon knowledge learned in
                                           kindergarten to develop more sophisticated understandings of each discipline.


                                           In second grade, students continue the integrative approach to social studies
                                           through the context of the local community. This the first time students are
                         The Local         introduced to a social environment larger than their immediate surroundings
     Second
                        Community          and they draw upon knowledge learned in previous grades to develop more
                                           sophisticated understandings to explore the social studies disciplines of history,
                                           geography, civics and government, and economics.


                                          Third grade students explore the social studies disciplines of history, geography,
                                          civics and government, and economics through the context of Michigan studies.
                                          Building on prior social studies knowledge and applying new concepts of each
      Third          Michigan Studies     social studies discipline to the increasingly complex social environment of their
                                          state, the third grade content expectations help prepare students for more
                                          sophisticated studies of their country and world in later grades.


                                           Using the context of the United States, fourth grade students learn significant
                        United States      social studies concepts within an increasingly complex social environment.
      Fourth                               They examine fundamental concepts in geography, civics and government, and
                           Studies
                                           economics through the lens of Michigan history and the United States.


                                          The fifth grade social studies content expectations mark a departure from the
                                          social studies approach taken in previous grades. Building upon the geography,
                                          civics and government, and economics concepts of the United States mastered
                                          in fourth grade and historical inquiry from earlier grades, the fifth grade
                                          expectations begin a more disciplinary-centered approach concentrating on
                         Integrated
                          American        the early history of the United States. Students begin their study of American
       Fifth
                           History        history with American Indian peoples before the arrival of European explorers
                                          and conclude with the adoption of the Bill of Rights in 1791. Although the
                                          content expectations are organized by historical era, they build upon students’
                                          understandings of the other social studies disciplines from earlier grades and
                                          require students to apply these concepts within the context of American history.




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS         V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                          9
     K -  Overview


                                         K-5 Social Studies Overview Chart

                                                                                                        Public Discourse,
                                                      Civics and                                        Decision Making,
       History                 Geography             Government                   Economics
                                                                                                           and Citizen
                                                                                                          Involvement

Living and                The World in            Purposes of                 Market Economy           Identifying and
Working Together          Spatial Terms           Government                  Use fundamental          Analyzing Public
Use historical thinking   Use geographic          Explain why people          principles and           Issues
to understand the past    representations to      create governments.         concepts of economics    Clearly state a
in the local community.   acquire, process, and                               to understand            problem as a public
                                                  Values and
                          report information                                  economic activity in a   policy issue, analyze
Michigan History                                  Principles of
                          from a spatial                                      market economy.          various perspectives,
Use historical thinking                           American
                          perspective.                                                                 and generate and
to understand the past                            Democracy                   National
                                                                                                       evaluate possible
in Michigan.            Places and                Understand values           Economy
                                                                                                       alternative resolutions.
                        Regions                   and principles              Use fundamental
United States
                        Understand how            of American                 principles and           Persuasive
History
                        regions are created       constitutional              concepts of economics    Communication
Use historical thinking
                        from common               democracy.                  to understand            Communicate a
to understand the
                        physical and human                                    economic activity in     reasoned position on
history of the United                             Structure and
                        characteristics.                                      the United States.       a public issue.
States in the following                           Function of
eras:                   Human Systems             Government                  International            Citizen
                        Understand how            Describe the structure      Economy                  Involvement
• Beginnings to 1620
                        human activities help     of government in the        Use fundamental          Act constructively to
• Colonization and
                        shape the Earth’s         United States and           principles and           further the public
   Settlement
                        surface.                  how it functions to         concepts of economics    good.
• Revolution and the
                                                  serve citizens.             to understand
   New Nation to 1791 Environment and
                                                                              economic activity in
                        Society                   Role of the
                                                                              the global economy.
                        Understand the effects    Citizen in
                        of human-environment      American
                        interactions.             Democracy
                                                  Explain important
                                                  rights and how, when,
                                                  and where American
                                                  citizens demonstrate
                                                  their responsibilities
                                                  by participating in
                                                  government.




10     GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07        MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  Myself and Others                                                                      Kindergarten

Using a familiar context for five and six year olds, kindergartners learn about the social studies disciplines (history,
geography, civics and government, and economics) through the lens of “Myself and Others.” Accordingly, each
discipline focuses on developing rudimentary understandings through an integrated approach to the field.

History
In history, students begin to develop a sense of time and chronology using events from their own lives setting the
foundation for understanding the past in subsequent grades.The expectations are intended to enable teachers to
integrate social studies with the language arts as students develop an understanding of the temporal order of stories.
Additionally, students are introduced to how people learn about the past as a building block for understanding the
discipline of history in later grades.

Geography
Using the immediate environment, students develop geographic awareness.They begin to recognize that geographers
use maps to represent places. As a prerequisite to developing a spatial perspective, students explore positional
and directional words and their meaning to identify significant locations in the classroom.The introduction of the
concept that people use the environment to fulfill human needs and wants prepares students for a more in-depth
study of human-environment interactions in subsequent grades.

Civics
The content expectations lay the foundation for the development of civics by focusing on the values and principles
of American democracy. Using their classroom and own experiences, students begin to understand why rights have
limits and are introduced to the concept of fairness in making group decisions. Students also begin to explore
different symbols that represent ideals of our nation such as the American flag. Kindergarten also prepares
students to become good citizens as they develop an appreciation of the importance of self-discipline and individual
responsibility in a democratic republic.

Economics
Students develop an understanding of economic concepts through practical examples. Students describe economic
wants, distinguish between goods and services that fulfill those wants, and recognize exchanges in which they
participate.These foundational ideas prepare students for a deeper understanding of economics in succeeding
grades.

Public Discourse, Decision Making, and Citizen Involvement
Using classroom issues as examples, kindergarten students are introduced to the idea of public issues and the
importance of citizen action in a democratic republic. Kindergarten students learn that people have different
opinions on issues and begin to develop competency in expressing their own opinions relative to classroom issues.
Students also begin to construct and explain simple graphs as a way of interpreting and analyzing data relating to
public issues.This foundational knowledge is built upon throughout the grades as students learn how, when, and
where to communicate their positions on public issues with a reasoned argument.




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                 11
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                                             Kindergarten

HISTORy

H2     Living and Working Together
       Use historical thinking to understand the past.
       K – H2.0.1     Distinguish among yesterday, today, tomorrow.
       K – H2.0.2     Create a timeline using events from their own lives (e.g., birth, crawling, walking, loss of first
                      tooth, first day of school).
       K – H2.0.3     Identify the beginning, middle, and end of historical narratives or stories.
       K – H2.0.4     Describe ways people learn about the past (e.g., photos, artifacts, diaries, stories, videos).


GEOGRAPHy

G1     The World in Spatial Terms
       Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from a spatial perspective.
       K – G1.0.1     Recognize that maps and globes represent places.
       K – G1.0.2     Use environmental directions or positional words (up/down, in/out, above/below) to identify
                      significant locations in the classroom.

G2     Places and Regions
       Understand how regions are created from common physical and human characteristics.
       K – G2.0.1     Identify and describe places in the immediate environment (e.g., classroom, home, playground).

G5     Environment and Society
       Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
       K – G5.0.1     Describe ways people use the environment to meet human needs and wants (e.g., food, shelter,
                      clothing).


CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT

C2     Values and Principles of American Democracy
       Understand values and principles of American constitutional democracy.
       K – C2.0.1     Identify our country’s flag as an important symbol of the United States.
       K – C2.0.2     Explain why people do not have the right to do whatever they want (e.g., to promote fairness,
                      ensure the common good, maintain safety).
       K – C2.0.3     Describe fair ways for groups to make decisions.

C5     Role of the Citizen in American Democracy
       Explain important rights and how, when, and where American citizens demonstrate their responsibilities by participating
       in government.
       K – C5.0.1     Describe situations in which they demonstrated self-discipline and individual responsibility
                      (e.g., caring for a pet, completing chores, following school rules, working in a group, taking
                      turns).




1     GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  Social Studies Content Expectations                                                               Kindergarten

ECONOMICS

E1    Market Economy
      Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity in a market economy.
      K - E1.0.1      Describe economic wants they have experienced.
      K - E1.0.2      Distinguish between goods and services.
      K - E1.0.3      Recognize situations in which people trade.


PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)

P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
      Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible
      alternative resolutions.
      K – P3.1.1      Identify classroom issues.
      K – P3.1.2      Use simple graphs to explain information about a classroom issue.
      K – P3.1.3      Compare their viewpoint about a classroom issue with the viewpoint of another person.

P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
      Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
      K – P3.3.1      Express a position on a classroom issue.

P4.2 Citizen Involvement
      Act constructively to further the public good.
      K – P4.2.1      Develop and implement an action plan to address or inform others about a public issue.
      K – P4.2.2      Participate in projects to help or inform others.




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION               1
     Families and Schools                                                                        Grade One

In first grade, students continue to explore the social studies disciplines of history, geography, civics and government,
and economics through an integrated approach using the context of families and schools. This is the students’ first
introduction to social institutions as they draw upon knowledge learned in kindergarten to develop more sophisticated
understandings of each discipline.

History
First grade students begin to develop the ability to think like a historian. Using a calendar, students begin to understand
the passage of time.They then apply their understanding of time and chronology by using events from family and school,
extending their understanding of the past to events beyond their own lifetimes. Using events to which they have a
personal connection, students learn that history involves stories of the past. By exploring relevant primary sources such
as photographs, diaries, and artifacts, students develop simple narratives of the history of families or school. Students also
learn to draw generalizations and conclusions about changes over time by comparing family life, school, jobs, and methods
of communication in their lives, to those in the past. In examining why certain events and people are celebrated through
national holidays, students begin to appreciate the influence history has on their daily lives.The study of history through
the lens of families and schools in first grade prepares students for more complex investigations of the past of their
community, state, and country in later grades.

Geography
The expectations in first grade build upon simple understandings of maps. Students’ spatial perspective is deepened by
constructing classroom maps to illustrate aerial perspective and introducing absolute and relative location using the
familiar contexts of home and school. Students begin to use personal directions to describe the relative location of
different places in the school environment. Students use maps and globes to distinguish physical characteristics of Earth,
such as landmasses and oceans. In introducing students to the concepts of region and human systems, first grade sets
the stage for more sophisticated study of these concepts in later grades. By using their immediate school environment,
students learn to distinguish between physical and human characteristics of place, and describe unifying characteristics of
different regions within their classroom and school. Students begin to build an understanding of the different aspects of
culture through a comparison of family life.They learn that people not only use the environment, but also modify or adapt
to the environment.

Civics and Government
The content expectations in civics use the school as a context for learning about the purposes of government, the values
and principles of American democracy, and the roles of citizens. Building upon the concept that people are not free to
do whatever they want, students identify reasons for rules in school. Concepts of power and authority are introduced
as students identify examples of people using power with and without authority in the school setting. Drawing upon the
notion of fairness from kindergarten, students explore fair ways to resolve conflicts at school. The expectations broaden
students’ understanding of the values and principles of American democracy using significant symbols of the United States.
Notions of individual responsibilities introduced in kindergarten are expanded to include civic responsibilities as members
of a group or school community.Thus, students begin to recognize that respect for the rule of law and the rights of
others is fundamental to our system of government.

Economics
First grade students extend their understanding of basic economic concepts.They distinguish between producers
and consumers and examine ways in which their families consume goods and services. Using practical examples and
personal experiences, students begin to learn how scarcity forces people to make choices. Students develop a deeper
understanding of trade as they explore the reasons why people trade, how money simplifies trade, and how people earn
money.These concepts lay the foundation for more complex studies of economic principles in later years.

Public Discourse, Decision Making, and Citizen Involvement
In first grade, students continue to develop an understanding of public issues and the importance of citizen action in a
democratic republic. First grade students identify public issues in the school community and analyze data about them.
They investigate different resolutions to these issues. Students begin to develop competency in expressing their own
opinions relative to a public issue in school by justifying their opinions with reasons.This foundational knowledge is built
upon throughout the grades as students develop a greater understanding of how, when, and where to communicate their
positions on public issues with a reasoned argument.




1      GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                   Grade One

HISTORy

H2    Living and Working Together in Families and Schools
      Use historical thinking to understand the past.
      1 – H2.0.1     Demonstrate chronological thinking by distinguishing among past, present, and future using family
                     or school events.
      1 – H2.0.2     Use a calendar to distinguish among days, weeks, and months.
      1 – H2.0.3     Investigate a family history for at least two generations, identifying various members and their
                     connections in order to tell a narrative about family life.
      1 – H2.0.4     Retell in sequence important ideas and details from stories about families or schools.
      1 – H2.0.5     Use historical records and artifacts (e.g., photos, diaries, oral histories, and videos) to draw
                     possible conclusions about family or school life in the past.
      1 – H2.0.6     Compare life today with life in the past using the criteria of family, school, jobs, or
                     communication.
      1 – H2.0.7     Identify the events or people celebrated during United States national holidays and why
                     we celebrate them (e.g., Independence Day, Constitution Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day;
                     Presidents’ Day).


GEOGRAPHy

G1    The World in Spatial Terms
      Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from a spatial perspective.
      1 – G1.0.1     Construct simple maps of the classroom to demonstrate aerial perspective.
      1 – G1.0.2     Give examples of places that have absolute locations (e.g., home address, school address).
      1 – G1.0.3     Use personal directions (left, right, front, back) to describe the relative location of significant
                     places in the school environment.
      1 – G1.0.4     Distinguish between landmasses and bodies of water using maps and globes.

G2    Places and Regions
      Understand how regions are created from common physical and human characteristics.
      1 – G2.0.1     Distinguish between physical (e.g., clouds, trees, weather) and human (e.g., buildings, playgrounds,
                     sidewalks) characteristics of places.
      1 – G2.0.2     Describe the unifying characteristics and/or boundaries of different school regions (e.g.,
                     playground, reading corner, library, restroom).

G4    Human Systems
      Understand how human activities help shape the Earth’s surface.
      1 – G4.0.1     Use components of culture (e.g., foods, language, religion, traditions) to describe diversity in
                     family life.

G5    Environment and Society
      Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
      1 – G5.0.1     Describe ways in which people modify (e.g., cutting down trees, building roads) and adapt to the
                     environment (e.g., clothing, housing, transportation).




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                1
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                Grade One


CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
C1      Purposes of Government
        Explain why people create governments.
        1 – C1.0.1     Identify some reasons for rules in school (e.g., provide order, predictability, and safety).
        1 – C1.0.2     Give examples of the use of power with authority in school (e.g., principal, teacher or bus driver
                       enforcing school rules).
        1 – C1.0.3     Give examples of the use of power without authority in school (e.g., types of bullying, taking cuts
                       in line).
C2      Values and Principles of American Democracy
        Understand values and principles of American constitutional democracy.
        1 – C2.0.1     Explain how decisions can be made or how conflicts might be resolved in fair and just ways
                       (e.g., majority rules).
        1 – C2.0.2     Identify important symbols of the United States of America (e.g., Statue of Liberty, Uncle Sam,
                       White House, Bald Eagle).
C5      Roles of the Citizen in American Democracy
        Explain important rights and how, when, and where American citizens demonstrate their responsibilities by participating
        in government.
        1 – C5.0.1     Describe some responsibilities people have at home and at school (e.g., taking care of oneself,
                       respect for the rights of others, following rules, getting along with others).
        1 – C5.0.2     Identify situations in which people act as good citizens in the school community (e.g.,
                       thoughtful and effective participation in the school decisions, respect for the rights of others,
                       respect for rule of law, voting, volunteering, compassion, courage, honesty).
ECONOMICS
E1      Market Economy
        Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity in a market economy.
        1 – E1.0.1     Distinguish between producers and consumers of goods and services.
        1 – E1.0.2     Describe ways in which families consume goods and services.
        1 – E1.0.3     Using examples, explain why people cannot have everything they want (scarcity) and describe
                       how people respond (choice).
        1 – E1.0.4     Describe reasons why people voluntarily trade.
        1 – E1.0.5     Describe ways in which people earn money (e.g., providing goods and services to others, jobs).
        1 – E1.0.6     Describe how money simplifies trade.




1     GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                   Grade One

PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)
P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
      Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible
      alternative resolutions.
      1 – P3.1.1      Identify public issues in the school community.
      1 – P3.1.2      Use graphic data to analyze information about a public issue in the school community.
      1 – P3.1.3      Identify alternative resolutions to a public issue in the school community.
P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
      Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
      1 – P3.3.1      Express a position on a public policy issue in the school community and justify the position with a
                      reasoned argument.

P4.2 Citizen Involvement
      Act constructively to further the public good.
      1 – P4.2.1      Develop and implement an action plan to address or inform others about a public issue.
      1 – P4.2.2      Participate in projects to help or inform others.




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION               17
 The Local Community                                                                             Grade Two

     In second grade, students continue the integrative approach to social studies through the context of the local
     community. This is the first time students are introduced to a social environment larger than their immediate
     surroundings and they draw upon knowledge learned in previous grades to develop more sophisticated understandings
     to explore the social studies disciplines of history, geography, civics and government, and economics.

     History
     In second grade, students further develop abilities to think like a historian by using the tools of the discipline. Students
     use a timeline of local community events to demonstrate chronological thinking. Using examples from the past, students
     start to understand the significant role of the individual in shaping history.The content expectations also introduce
     students to the concept of perspective by asking students to explain why people can describe the same event differently.
     Additionally, the expectations expand students’ ability to think historically as they explore changes over time as well as
     localized events. In preparing students to evaluate decisions from the past in later grades, the expectations ask students
     to examine how a local community problem in the past was addressed. Students demonstrate their understanding
     of history by constructing a historical narrative of the local community, which serves as a building block for more
     sophisticated analyses and writing in subsequent grades.

     Geography
     In developing geographic understandings, students draw upon prior knowledge of spatial awareness, place, human
     systems, and human-environment interactions from earlier grades to create more complex understandings using the
     context of the local community. Geographic representations (maps) of areas outside their immediate environment
     introduce students to the use of symbols, labels, and legends to denote human and natural features. Students use maps
     to describe the spatial organization of their local community, applying relative location and using distance, direction, and
     scale. In addition to learning more elaborate distinctions between human and physical characteristics by studying the
     local community, students compare these characteristics to those of another community.They use these attributes to
     further their understanding of region by exploring how their local community is part of larger regions such as county,
     state, and country. Students expand upon the concept of human systems and human-environment interactions by
     examining local land use, as well as the positive and negative consequences of changing the physical environment. As a
     starting point for understanding the global economy in later grades, the second grade expectations introduce students
     to the geographic theme of movement as they explore how people, goods, and ideas move within the local community.
     These foundations prepare students for a more elaborate understanding of geography, as they examine their state,
     country, and world in subsequent grades.

     Civics and Government
     In second grade, students explore government in the United States. Building upon earlier understandings of the
     purposes for rules in the classroom, second grade students explore the reasons why people form governments.
     Students begin to understand the distinction between government action and private action, which sets the foundation
     for understanding the powers and limits of governmental authority in later grades. Students also examine situations in
     which the local government seeks to balance individual rights with the common good in solving community problems.
     They describe how the Pledge of Allegiance reflects the core democratic value of patriotism. Using examples of how the
     local government makes, enforces, and interprets the laws, students begin to explore formal structures of government
     and how government influences the lives of citizens.These understandings provide foundations for the study of state and
     national government in later grades.
     In second grade, students are introduced to the role of government in the economy as they learn about the role
     of taxes and fees in paying for government services.The expectations help to prepare students for responsible
     citizenship by exploring how citizens participate in community decisions and by examining why both personal and civic
     responsibility are important aspects of community life. Students apply this knowledge by designing and participating in
     community improvement projects.

     Economics
     Second grade students build upon basic economic concepts they have applied to personal experiences in previous
     grades. They continue to work with the concepts of scarcity and choice and learn to identify opportunity cost in
     consumer decisions. Significantly, the expectations broaden the context of study of communities. Using the lens of the
     local community, students identify different types of businesses and make connections between local businesses and the
     economic wants of people or other businesses. Students are introduced to the concepts of natural, human, and capital
     resources using local community examples. In doing so, they begin to recognize examples of economic specialization and
     its relationship to trade.

18       GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Public Discourse, Decision Making, and Citizen Involvement
Students develop a more sophisticated understanding of public issues, and the importance of citizen action in a
democratic republic. Second grade students begin to recognize that conflicts among core democratic values often
lead people to want different resolutions to a public policy issue in the local community.They identify public issues in
the local community, analyze data about these community issues, and evaluate alternative resolutions.They use core
democratic values to demonstrate why people may differ on the resolution of a community issue as they continue to
develop competency in expressing their own opinions relative to these issues and justify their opinions with reasons.
This foundational knowledge is built upon throughout the grades as students develop a greater understanding of how,
when, and where to communicate their positions on public issues with a reasoned argument.




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                 19
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                 Grade Two

HISTORy

H2      Living and Working Together in Communities
        Use historical thinking to understand the past.
        2 – H2.0.1     Demonstrate chronological thinking by distinguishing among years and decades using a timeline
                       of local community events.
        2 – H2.0.2     Explain why descriptions of the same event in the local community can be different.
        2 – H2.0.3     Use an example to describe the role of the individual in creating history.
        2 – H2.0.4     Describe changes in the local community over time (e.g., types of businesses, architecture and
                       landscape, jobs, transportation, population).
        2 – H2.0.5     Identify a problem in a community’s past and describe how it was resolved.
        2 – H2.0.6     Construct a historical narrative about the history of the local community from a variety of
                       sources (e.g., data gathered from local residents, artifacts, photographs).

GEOGRAPHy

G1      The World in Spatial Terms
        Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from a spatial perspective.
        2 – G1.0.1     Construct maps of the local community that contain symbols, labels, and legends denoting
                       human and natural characteristics of place.
        2 – G1.0.2     Use maps to describe the spatial organization of the local community by applying concepts
                       including relative location and using distance, direction, and scale.

G2      Places and Regions
        Understand how regions are created from common physical and human characteristics.
        2 – G2.0.1     Compare the physical and human characteristics of the local community with those of another
                       community.
        2 – G2.0.2     Describe how the local community is part of a larger region (e.g., county, metropolitan area, state).

G4      Human Systems
        Understand how human activities help shape the Earth’s surface.
        2 – G4.0.1     Describe land use in the community (e.g., where people live, where services are provided, where
                       products are made).
        2 – G4.0.2     Describe the means people create for moving people, goods, and ideas within the local
                       community.
        2 – G4.0.3     Use components of culture (e.g., foods, language, religion, traditions) to describe diversity in the
                       local community.

G5      Environment and Society
        Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
        2 – G5.0.1     Suggest ways people can responsibly interact with the environment in the local community.
        2 – G5.0.2     Describe positive and negative consequences of changing the physical environment of the local
                       community.




0      GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                   Grade Two

CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
C1    Purposes of Government
      Explain why people create governments.
      2 – C1.0.1    Explain why people form governments.
      2 – C1.0.2    Distinguish between government action and private action.


C2    Values and Principles of American Democracy
      Understand values and principles of American constitutional democracy.
      2 – C2.0.1    Explain how local governments balance individual rights with the common good to solve local
                    community problems.
      2 – C2.0.2    Describe how the Pledge of Allegiance reflects the core democratic value of patriotism.
C3    Structure and Functions of Government
      Describe the structure of government in the United States and how it functions to serve citizens.
      2 – C3.0.1     Give examples of how local governments make, enforce, and interpret laws (ordinances) in the
                     local community.
      2 – C3.0.2     Use examples to describe how local government affects the lives of its citizens.
      2 – C3.0.3     Identify services commonly provided by local governments (e.g., police, fire departments, schools,
                     libraries, parks).
C5    Roles of the Citizen in American Democracy
      Explain important rights and how, when, and where American citizens demonstrate their responsibilities by participating
      in government.
      2 – C5.0.1     Identify ways citizens participate in community decisions.
      2 – C5.0.2     Distinguish between personal and civic responsibilities and explain why they are important in
                     community life.
      2 – C5.0.3     Design and participate in community improvement projects that help or inform others.
                     (See P4.2.2)


ECONOMICS
E1    Market Economy
      Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity in a market economy.
      2 – E1.0.1     Identify the opportunity cost involved in a consumer decision.
      2 – E1.0.2     Identify businesses in the local community.
      2 – E1.0.3     Describe how businesses in the local community meet economic wants of consumers.
      2 – E1.0.4     Describe the natural, human, and capital resources needed for production of a good or service in
                     a community.
      2 – E1.0.5     Use examples to show that people cannot produce everything they want (specialization) and
                     depend on trade with others to meet their wants.




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION               1
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                   Grade Two

PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)
P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
        Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible
        alternative resolutions.
        2 – P3.1.1      Identify public issues in the local community that influence the daily lives of its citizens.
        2 – P3.1.2      Use graphic data and other sources to analyze information about a public issue in the local
                        community and evaluate alternative resolutions.
        2 – P3.1.3      Give examples of how conflicts over core democratic values lead people to differ on resolutions
                        to a public policy issue in the local community.

P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
        Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
        2 – P3.3.1   Compose a statement expressing a position on a public policy issue in the local community and
                     justify the position with a reasoned argument.

P4.2 Citizen Involvement
        Act constructively to further the public good.
        2 – P4.2.1      Develop and implement an action plan to address or inform others about a public issue.
        2 – P4.2.2      Participate in projects to help or inform others.




     GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Michigan Studies                                                                          Grade Three

Third grade students explore the social studies disciplines of history, geography, civics and government, and economics
through the context of Michigan studies. Building on prior social studies knowledge and applying new concepts of
each social studies discipline to the increasingly complex social environment of their state, the third grade content
expectations prepare students for more sophisticated studies of their country and world in later grades.

History
In third grade, students refine their abilities to think like a historian by identifying the types of questions that
historians ask. Building upon experiences of timeline construction, students sequence early periods of Michigan
history from exploration through attaining statehood.The expectations move students from examining a variety
of simple sources to understanding how historians use both primary and secondary sources to learn about the
past. Students use both types of sources as they explore the early history of Michigan, providing a rich connection
to the English language arts.Through traditional stories, students learn about the beliefs of American Indians. They
compare how American Indians and settlers interacted with their environment through informational text. The
skill of constructing historical narratives is developed using the context of daily life in the early settlements. The
expectations build on students’ sense of chronology by requiring students to describe causal relationships among
events. These foundational understandings prepare students for more sophisticated writing and analyses as they
prepare to study United States history in subsequent grades.

Geography
Third grade students draw upon prior knowledge to create more complex understandings of geographic concepts
using the context of Michigan. They further develop spatial awareness through the use of more complex maps of
Michigan. Students refine the concept of regions as they explore different ways Michigan can be divided into regions
and learn about the different geographic regions to which Michigan belongs. Building upon their knowledge of human
systems, students investigate current economic activities in Michigan and explore factors that influence the location
of these economic activities. The expectations also extend the geographic theme of movement as students describe
current movements of goods, people, jobs, or information to, from, or within Michigan, and investigate the reasons for
the movements. In addressing human-environment interactions, the expectations integrate history as students apply
their knowledge of how people adapt to, use, and modify the environment to the more complex social environment
of their state. More sophisticated understandings are also created as students locate different natural resources
in Michigan and analyze the consequences of their use.These foundations prepare students for a more elaborate
understanding of geography as they examine their country and world in subsequent grades.

Civics and Government
In extending students’ civic perspective beyond the family, neighborhood, and community to the state, the third grade
content expectations prepare students for their role as responsible and informed citizens of Michigan. Building
upon their knowledge of government of the local community, students distinguish the roles of state government
from local government. Using the context of state government, students examine the concept of separation of
powers by exploring the powers of each branch of state government. By examining how the state courts function to
resolve conflicts, students deepen their understanding of the rule of law. The idea of representative government is
introduced. By focusing on key concepts, such as citizens’ rights and responsibilities, separation of powers, individual
rights, rules of law, representative government, and justice, students are prepared for the roles of citizens in our
democratic republic.




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS             V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION            
Economics
Third grade students refine their understanding of the principles and concepts of economics. Building on a basic
understanding of scarcity and choice, students learn to appreciate the relationships among scarcity, choice, and
opportunity costs in making economic decisions. In addition, students are introduced to how incentives impact
economic decision making. Students explore Michigan’s economy by examining how natural resources have
influenced economic development in the state. An introduction to the concepts of entrepreneurship, specialization,
and interdependence allows students to explore the relationship of Michigan to the national and global economies.
Finally, students use these concepts to consider the role of new business development in Michigan’s future.

Public Discourse, Decision Making, and Citizen Involvement
Students continue to develop a more sophisticated understanding of public issues and the importance of citizen
action in a democratic republic. Using the context of Michigan, third grade students identify public policy issues
facing citizens in Michigan, use graphic data and other sources to analyze information about the issue, and evaluate
alternative resolutions. By utilizing core democratic values to demonstrate why people may differ on the resolution
of a state issue, students continue to develop competency in expressing their own opinions relative to these issues
and justify their opinions with reasons.This foundational knowledge is built upon throughout the grades as students
develop a greater understanding of how, when, and where to communicate their positions on public issues with a
reasoned argument.




     GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS           V. 12/07    MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                Grade Three

HISTORy
H3    History of Michigan (Through Statehood)
      Use historical thinking to understand the past.
      3 – H3.0.1     Identify questions historians ask in examining the past in Michigan (e.g.,What happened? When
                     did it happen? Who was involved? How and why did it happen?)
      3 – H3.0.2     Explain how historians use primary and secondary sources to answer questions about the past.
      3 – H3.0.3     Describe the causal relationships between three events in Michigan’s past (e.g., Erie Canal, more
                     people came, statehood).
      3 – H3.0.4     Draw upon traditional stories of American Indians (e.g.,Anishinaabeg - Ojibway (Chippewa),
                     Odawa (Ottawa), Potawatomi; Menominee; Huron Indians) who lived in Michigan in order to
                     make generalizations about their beliefs.
      3 – H3.0.5     Use informational text and visual data to compare how American Indians and settlers in the early
                     history of Michigan adapted to, used, and modified their environment.
      3 – H3.0.6     Use a variety of sources to describe interactions that occurred between American Indians and
                     the first European explorers and settlers in Michigan.
      3 – H3.0.7     Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to construct a historical narrative about daily life
                     in the early settlements of Michigan (pre-statehood).
      3 – H3.0.8     Use case studies or stories to describe how the ideas or actions of individuals affected the
                     history of Michigan.
      3 – H3.0.9     Describe how Michigan attained statehood.
      3 – H3.0.10    Create a timeline to sequence early Michigan history (American Indians, exploration, settlement,
                     statehood).



GEOGRAPHy
G1    The World in Spatial Terms
      Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from a spatial perspective.
      3 – G1.0.1     Use cardinal directions (north, south, east, west) to describe the relative location of significant
                     places in the immediate environment.
      3 – G1.0.2     Use thematic maps to identify and describe the physical and human characteristics of Michigan.
G2    Places and Regions
      Understand how regions are created from common physical and human characteristics.
      3 – G2.0.1     Use a variety of visual materials and data sources to describe ways in which Michigan can be
                     divided into regions.
      3 – G2.0.2     Describe different regions to which Michigan belongs (e.g., Great Lakes Region, Midwest).




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION            
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                                              Grade Three

G4      Human Systems
        Understand how human activities help shape the Earth’s surface.
        3 – G4.0.1     Describe major kinds of economic activity in Michigan today, such as agriculture (e.g., corn,
                       cherries, dairy), manufacturing (e.g., automobiles, wood products), services and tourism, research
                       and development (e.g.,Automation Alley, life sciences corridor, university communities), and
                       explain the factors influencing the location of these economic activities. (E)
        3 – G4.0.2     Describe diverse groups that have come into a region of Michigan and reasons why they came
                       (push/pull factors). (H)
        3 – G4.0.3     Describe some of the current movements of goods, people, jobs or information to, from, or
                       within Michigan and explain reasons for the movements. (E)
        3 – G4.0.4     Use data and current information about the Anishinaabeg and other American Indians living in
                       Michigan today to describe the cultural aspects of modern American Indian life; give an example
                       of how another cultural group in Michigan today has preserved and built upon its cultural
                       heritage.


G5      Environment and Society
        Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
        3 – G5.0.1     Locate natural resources in Michigan and explain the consequences of their use.
        3 – G5.0.2     Describe how people adapt to, use, and modify the natural resources of Michigan. (H)


CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT

C1      Purposes of Government
        Explain why people create governments.
        3 – C1.0.1     Give an example of how Michigan state government fulfills one of the purposes of government
                       (e.g., protecting individual rights, promoting the common good, ensuring equal treatment under
                       the law).

C2      Values and Principles of American Government
        Understand values and principles of American constitutional democracy.
        3 – C2.0.1     Describe how Michigan state government reflects the principle of representative government.

C3      Structure and Functions of Government
        Describe the structure of government in the United States and how it functions to serve citizens.
        3 – C3.0.1     Distinguish between the roles of state and local government.
        3 – C3.0.2     Identify goods and services provided by the state government and describe how they are funded
                       (e.g., taxes, fees, fines).
        3 – C3.0.3     Identify the three branches of state government in Michigan and the powers of each.
        3 – C3.0.4     Explain how state courts function to resolve conflict.
        3 – C3.0.5     Describe the purpose of the Michigan Constitution.

C5      Roles of the Citizen in American Democracy
        Explain important rights and how, when, and where American citizens demonstrate their responsibilities by participating
        in government.
        3 – C5.0.1     Identify rights (e.g., freedom of speech, freedom of religion, right to own property) and
                       responsibilities of citizenship (e.g., respecting the rights of others, voting, obeying laws).


      GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                Grade Three


ECONOMICS
E1    Market Economy
      Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity in a market economy.
      3 – E1.0.1      Explain how scarcity, opportunity costs, and choices affect what is produced and consumed in
                      Michigan.
      3 – E1.0.2      Identify incentives (e.g., sales, tax breaks) that influence economic decisions people make in
                      Michigan.
      3 – E1.0.3      Analyze how Michigan’s location and natural resources influenced its economic development
                      (e.g., how waterways and other natural resources have influenced economic activities such as
                      mining, lumbering, automobile manufacturing, and furniture making). (H, G)
      3 – E1.0.4      Describe how entrepreneurs combine natural, human, and capital resources to produce goods
                      and services in Michigan. (H, G)
      3 – E1.0.5      Explain the role of business development in Michigan’s economic future.

E2    National Economy
      Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity in the United States.
      3 – E2.0.1      Using a Michigan example, describe how specialization leads to increased interdependence
                      (cherries grown in Michigan are sold in Florida; oranges grown in Florida are sold in Michigan).

E3    International Economy
      Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity in the global economy.
      3 – E3.0.1      Identify products produced in other countries and consumed by people in Michigan.


PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)
P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Issues
      Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible
      alternative resolutions.
      3 – P3.1.1      Identify public issues in Michigan that influence the daily lives of its citizens.
      3 – P3.1.2      Use graphic data and other sources to analyze information about a public issue in Michigan and
                      evaluate alternative resolutions.
      3 – P3.1.3      Give examples of how conflicts over core democratic values lead people to differ on resolutions
                      to a public policy issue in Michigan.
P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
      Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
      3 – P3.3.1      Compose a paragraph expressing a position on a public policy issue in Michigan and justify the
                      position with a reasoned argument.

P4.2 Citizen Involvement
      Act constructively to further the public good.
      3 – P4.2.1      Develop and implement an action plan and know how, when, and where to address or inform
                      others about a public issue.
      3 – P4.2.2      Participate in projects to help or inform others.




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION               7
     United States Studies                                                                                 Grade Four

     Using the context of the United States, fourth grade students learn significant social studies concepts within an increasingly complex
     social environment.They examine fundamental concepts in geography, civics and government, and economics through the lens of
     Michigan history and the United States. Expectations that particularly lend themselves to being taught through a historic, geographic,
     civic, or economic lens are denoted.


     History
     Fourth grade students use examples from Michigan history (from statehood to the present) as a case study for learning about United
     States geography, economics, and government.Teachers are encouraged to use examples from Michigan history beyond statehood to
     teach geographic, civic, and economic concepts.


     Geography
     Students draw upon their knowledge of spatial awareness, regions, human systems, and human-environment interactions to
     create more sophisticated understandings of these concepts within the context of the United States. By focusing on the work of
     geographers, students explore the types of questions geographers ask and the tools they use to answer these questions. Students
     learn that maps can be used to describe elevation and climate, as well as to analyze patterns of population density. In preparation
     for the study of American history, students concentrate on the geography of the United States. Students expand their knowledge
     of human systems using case studies and stories to understand push and pull factors of migration and the influence of migration
     on culture within the United States. Students deepen their understanding of human-environment interactions by assessing positive
     and negative effects of human activities on the physical environment of the United States.The firm understanding of United States
     geography established in fourth grade prepares students for the study of American history in fifth grade and world geography in
     grades six and seven.


     Civics and Government
     Fourth grade students learn how the United States government works. Students examine the purposes of government as set
     forth in the Preamble to the U.S. Constitution, how our current form of government functions to serve those purposes, and the
     probable consequences of not having government, rules, or laws. Building upon their understanding of the structure and functions
     of government in Michigan, students use examples to explore how the powers of the federal government are limited. Students also
     begin to understand that the federal and state governments have different powers as a foundation for learning about federalism in
     fifth grade. Concepts of governmental taxing and spending are expanded from previous grades as students apply these concepts to
     the federal government. Students explore how key concepts such as popular sovereignty, rule of law, checks and balances, separation
     of powers, and individual rights serve to limit the power of government and how these ideas are manifested in the Constitution and
     Bill of Rights. Students learn how government affects their daily lives by identifying examples of rights guaranteed by the Constitution
     and Bill of Rights. Students explain why all rights have limits, describe the relationship between rights and responsibilities, and
     investigate ways people can work together to promote the values and principles of American democracy.


     Economics
     Fourth grade students continue to deepen their understanding of economic principles with a focus on the characteristics of market
     economies.They move beyond applying the economic concepts of scarcity, choice, and opportunity costs in personal economic
     decisions and begin to think like an economist, identifying the types of questions economists ask. Economic decision making is
     examined by applying the concepts of price, competition, and incentives. Students develop an understanding of specialization, division
     of labor, competition, and interdependence and explore their effects on productivity. Moreover, the circular flow model is introduced
     in fourth grade, providing a foundation for future studies in economics. Students build upon their knowledge of governmental taxing
     and spending as they explore why certain public goods are not privately owned. Students also take an increasingly sophisticated look
     at the global economy as the expectations explore the impact of global competition on the national economy.


     Public Discourse, Decision Making, and Citizen Involvement
     Students deepen their understanding of public issues and the importance of citizen action in a democratic republic. Using the
     context of the United States, fourth grade students identify public policy issues facing citizens in the United States, use graphic data
     and other sources to analyze information about the issue, and evaluate alternative resolutions. By utilizing examples, students expand
     their understanding of how conflicts among core democratic values often lead people to want different resolutions to a public policy
     question. Students demonstrate competency in expressing their own opinions relative to a public issue in the United States and
     justify their opinions with a reasoned argument with increasing complexity.This foundational knowledge is built upon throughout the
     grades as students use their knowledge of how, when, and where to communicate and become more proficient in communicating
     positions on sophisticated public issues with a reasoned argument.




8       GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                   V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                             Grade Four

HISTORy

H3    History of Michigan (Beyond Statehood)
      Use historical thinking to understand the past.
      4 – H3.0.1     Use historical inquiry questions to investigate the development of Michigan’s major economic
                     activities (agriculture, mining, manufacturing, lumbering, tourism, technology, and research) from
                     statehood to present. (C, E)
                     • What happened?
                     • When did it happen?
                     • Who was involved?
                     • How and why did it happen?
                     • How does it relate to other events or issues in the past, in the present, or in the future?
                     • What is its significance?

      4 – H3.0.2     Use primary and secondary sources to explain how migration and immigration affected and
                     continue to affect the growth of Michigan. (G)

      4 – H3.0.3     Describe how the relationship between the location of natural resources and the location of
                     industries (after 1837) affected and continues to affect the location and growth of Michigan cities.
                     (G, E)

      4 – H3.0.4     Draw upon stories, photos, artifacts, and other primary sources to compare the life of people in
                     towns and cities in Michigan and in the Great Lakes region during a variety of time periods from
                     1837 to the present (e.g., 1837-1900, 1900-1950, 1950-2000). (G)

      4 – H3.0.5     Use visual data and informational text or primary accounts to compare a major Michigan
                     economic activity today with that same or a related activity in the past. (E)

      4 – H3.0.6     Use a variety of primary and secondary sources to construct a historical narrative about the
                     beginnings of the automobile industry and the labor movement in Michigan. (G, E)

      4 – H3.0.7     Use case studies or stories to describe the ideas and actions of individuals involved in the
                     Underground Railroad in Michigan and in the Great Lakes region. (See 8-U4.2.2; 8-U4.3.2;
                     8-U5.1.5; USHG 7.2.4) (G, C, E)

      4 – H3.0.8     Describe past and current threats to Michigan’s natural resources; describe how Michigan worked
                     in the past and continues to work today to protect its natural resources. (G, C, E)

      4 – H3.0.9     Create timelines (using decades after 1930) to sequence and describe important events in
                     Michigan history; annotate with connections to the past and impact on the future.




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS             V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION              9
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                Grade Four

GEOGRAPHy

G1   The World in Spatial Terms
     Use geographic representations to acquire, process, and report information from a spatial perspective.
     4 – G1.0.1     Identify questions geographers ask in examining the United States (e.g.,Where it is? What is it
                    like there? How is it connected to other places?).
     4 – G1.0.2     Use cardinal and intermediate directions to describe the relative location of significant places in
                    the United States.
     4 – G1.0.3     Identify and describe the characteristics and purposes (e.g., measure distance, determine relative
                    location, classify a region) of a variety of geographic tools and technologies (e.g., globe, map,
                    satellite image).
     4 – G1.0.4     Use geographic tools and technologies, stories, songs, and pictures to answer geographic
                    questions about the United States.
     4 – G1.0.5     Use maps to describe elevation, climate, and patterns of population density in the United States.

G2   Places and Regions
     Understand how regions are created from common physical and human characteristics.
     4 – G2.0.1     Describe ways in which the United States can be divided into different regions (e.g., political
                    regions, economic regions, landform regions, vegetation regions).
     4 – G2.0.2     Compare human and physical characteristics of a region to which Michigan belongs (e.g., Great
                    Lakes, Midwest) with those of another region in the United States.

G4   Human Systems
     Understand how human activities help shape the Earth’s surface.
     4 – G4.0.1     Use a case study or story about migration within or to the United States to identify push and
                    pull factors (why they left, why they came) that influenced the migration. (H)
     4 – G4.0.2     Describe the impact of immigration to the United States on the cultural development of
                    different places or regions of the United States (e.g., forms of shelter, language, food). (H)

G5   Environment and Society
     Understand the effects of human-environment interactions.
     4 – G5.0.1     Assess the positive and negative effects of human activities on the physical environment of the
                    United States.




0   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                  Grade Four

CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT

C1    Purposes of Government
      Explain why people create governments.
      4 – C1.0.1     Identify questions political scientists ask in examining the United States (e.g.,What does
                     government do? What are the basic values and principles of American democracy? What is the
                     relationship of the United States to other nations? What are the roles of the citizen in American
                     democracy?).
      4 – C1.0.2     Explain probable consequences of an absence of government and of rules and laws.
      4 – C1.0.3     Describe the purposes of government as identified in the Preamble of the Constitution.

C2    Values and Principles of American Democracy
      Understand values and principles of American constitutional democracy.
      4 – C2.0.1     Explain how the principles of popular sovereignty, rule of law, checks and balances, separation of
                     powers, and individual rights (e.g., freedom of religion, freedom of expression, freedom of press)
                     serve to limit the powers of the federal government as reflected in the Constitution and Bill of
                     Rights.
      4 – C2.0.2     Identify situations in which specific rights guaranteed by the Constitution and Bill of Rights are
                     involved (e.g., freedom of religion, freedom of expression, freedom of press).

C3    Structure and Functions of Government
      Describe the structure of government in the United States and how it functions to serve citizens.
      4 – C3.0.1     Give examples of ways the Constitution limits the powers of the federal government
                     (e.g., election of public officers, separation of powers, checks and balances, Bill of Rights).
      4 – C3.0.2     Give examples of powers granted to the federal government (e.g., coining of money, declaring
                     war) and those reserved for the states (e.g., driver’s license, marriage license).
      4 – C3.0.3     Describe the organizational structure of the federal government in the United States (legislative,
                     executive, and judicial branches).
      4 – C3.0.4     Describe how the powers of the federal government are separated among the branches.
      4 – C3.0.5     Give examples of how the system of checks and balances limits the power of the federal
                     government (e.g., presidential veto of legislation, courts declaring a law unconstitutional,
                     congressional approval of judicial appointments).
      4 – C3.0.6     Describe how the President, members of the Congress, and justices of the Supreme Court come
                     to power (e.g., elections versus appointments).
      4 – C3.0.7     Explain how the federal government uses taxing and spending to serve the purposes of
                     government.

C5    Roles of the Citizen in American Democracy
      Explain important rights and how, when, and where American citizens demonstrate their responsibilities by
      participating in government.
      4 – C5.0.1     Explain responsibilities of citizenship (e.g., initiating changes in laws or policy, holding public office,
                     respecting the law, being informed and attentive to public issues, paying taxes, registering to vote
                     and voting knowledgeably, serving as a juror).
      4 – C5.0.2     Describe the relationship between rights and responsibilities of citizenship.
      4 – C5.0.3     Explain why rights have limits.
      4 – C5.0.4     Describe ways citizens can work together to promote the values and principles of American
                     democracy.



GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                1
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                              Grade Four

ECONOMICS

E1   Market Economy
     Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity in a market economy.
     4 – E1.0.1     Identify questions economists ask in examining the United States (e.g., What is produced?
                    How is it produced? How much is produced? Who gets what is produced? What role does
                    the government play in the economy?).
     4 – E1.0.2     Describe some characteristics of a market economy (e.g., private property rights, voluntary
                    exchange, competition, consumer sovereignty, incentives, specialization).
     4 – E1.0.3     Describe how positive and negative incentives influence behavior in a market economy.
     4 – E1.0.4     Explain how price affects decisions about purchasing goods and services (substitute goods).
     4 – E1.0.5     Explain how specialization and division of labor increase productivity (e.g., assembly line). (H)
     4 – E1.0.6     Explain how competition among buyers results in higher prices and competition among sellers
                    results in lower prices (e.g., supply, demand).
     4 – E1.0.7     Demonstrate the circular flow model by engaging in a market simulation, which includes
                    households and businesses and depicts the interactions among them.
     4 – E1.0.8     Explain why public goods (e.g., libraries, roads, parks, the Mackinac Bridge) are not privately
                    owned. (H)

E2   National Economy
     Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity in the United States.
     4 – E2.0.1     Explain how changes in the United States economy impact levels of employment and unemployment
                    (e.g., changing demand for natural resources, changes in technology, changes in competition). (H)

E3   International Economy
     Use fundamental principles and concepts of economics to understand economic activity in the global economy.
     4 – E3.0.1     Describe how global competition affects the national economy (e.g., outsourcing of jobs,
                    increased supply of goods, opening new markets, quality controls).




   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                    Grade Four

PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)

P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
       Clearly state a problem as a public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible
       alternative resolutions.
       4 – P3.1.1      Identify public issues in the United States that influence the daily lives of its citizens.
       4 – P3.1.2      Use graphic data and other sources to analyze information about a public issue in the United
                       States and evaluate alternative resolutions.
       4 – P3.1.3      Give examples of how conflicts over core democratic values lead people to differ on resolutions
                       to a public policy issue in the United States.

P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
       Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
       4 – P3.3.1      Compose a brief essay expressing a position on a public policy issue in the United States and
                       justify the position with a reasoned argument.

P4.2 Citizen Involvement
       Act constructively to further the public good.
       4 – P4.2.1      Develop and implement an action plan and know how, when, and where to address or inform
                       others about a public issue.
       4 – P4.2.2      Participate in projects to help or inform others.




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION               
UNDERSTANDING THE ORGANIzATIONAL STRUCTURE
The Grade Level Content Expectations for Grades 5-8 Social Studies are organized by discipline and
standard.The expectations emphasize the national geography and history standards, incorporate civics and
economics standards, and build the general social studies knowledge, processes, and skills that form the foundation
for high school social studies instruction.The structure is shown below.The skills and content addressed in these
standards will, in practice, be woven together in a coherent integrated manner in the social studies curriculum.
The expectations are meant to inform curriculum and assessment development.



                                 Grades 5-8 Social Studies Organizational Chart

        GRADE 5                          GRADE 6                                     GRADE 7                                  GRADE 8
        Integrated                   Western Hemisphere                         Eastern Hemisphere                            Integrated
        U.S. History                       Studies                                    Studies                                 U.S. History
     Disciplinary Knowledge             Disciplinary Knowledge                     Disciplinary Knowledge                Disciplinary Knowledge
 Historical and Geographical       Geographical and Historical               Geographical and Historical               Historical and Geographical
 Knowledge and Perspective         Knowledge and Perspective                 Knowledge and Perspective                 Knowledge and Perspective
 Historical and Geographical       Geographical and Historical               Geographical and Historical               Historical and Geographical
 Analysis and Interpretation       Analysis and Interpretation               Analysis and Interpretation               Analysis and Interpretation

       Grade Level Focus                    Grade Level Focus                         Grade Level Focus                     Grade Level Focus
 Thematic Analysis of              Geographic Analysis of                    Geographic Analysis of                    Thematic Analysis of
 U.S. History Eras 1-3             Culture and Global Issues                 Culture and Global Issues                 U.S. History Eras 3-5
 U1 USHG Era 1                     Thematic Analysis of                      Thematic Analysis of                      U3 USHG Era 3
 Beginnings to 1620                World History Eras 1-3 as it relates      World History Eras 1-3 as it relates      Revolution and the New Nation
                                   to the Western Hemisphere                 to the Eastern Hemisphere                 1754-1800
 U2 USHG Era 2
                                                                                                                       U4 USHG Era 4
 Colonization and Settlement       HISTORy                                   HISTORy                                   Expansion and Reform
 1585-1763                         H1 The World in Temporal Terms            H1 The World in Temporal Terms            1792-1861
 U3 USHG Era 3                     W1 WHG Era 1                              W1 WHG Era 1                              U5 USHG Era 5
 Revolution and the New Nation     The Beginnings of Human Society           The Beginnings of Human Society           Civil War and Reconstruction
 1754-1800                                                                                                             1850-1877
                                   W2 WHG Era 2                              W2 WHG Era 2
 EMBEDDED IN CONTExT               Early Civilizations and the               Early Civilizations and the               U6 USHG Era 6
 OF HISTORy                        Emergence of Pastoral Peoples             Emergence of Pastoral Peoples             1870-1898 in Grade 8
 G Geographic Perspective          W3 WHG Era 3                              W3 WHG Era 3                              EMBEDDED IN CONTExT
   • The World in Spatial Terms    Classical Traditions,World Religions,     Classical Traditions,World Religions,     OF HISTORy
   • Places and Regions            and Major Empires                         and Major Empires                         G Geographic Perspective
   • Physical Systems                                                                                                    • The World in Spatial Terms
   • Human Systems                 GEOGRAPHy                                 GEOGRAPHy
                                   G1 The World in Spatial Terms             G1 The World in Spatial Terms               • Places and Regions
   • Environment and Society                                                                                             • Human Systems
                                   G2 Places and Regions                     G2 Places and Regions
 C Civic Perspective               G3 Physical Systems                                                                   • Environment and Society
                                                                             G3 Physical Systems
   • Purposes of Government        G4 Human Systems                          G4 Human Systems                          C Civic Perspective
   • Role and Functions of         G5 Environment and Society                G5 Environment and Society                  • Conceptual Foundations
     Government                    G6 Global Issues Past and Present                                                     • Role and Functions of
                                                                             G6 Global Issues Past and Present
   • Values and Principles of                                                                                              Government
                                   CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT                     CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT                       • Values and Principles of
     American Democracy
                                   C1 Purposes of Government                 C1 Purposes of Government                     American Democracy
   • Role of the Citizen in                                                                                              • Role of the Citizen in
                                   C3 Structure and Functions of             C3 Structure and Functions of
     American Democracy                                                                                                    American Democracy
                                      Government                                Government
 E Economic Perspective            C4 Relationship of the United States to   C4 Relationship of the United States to   E Economic Perspective
   • Individual, Business, and        Other Nations and World Affairs           Other Nations and World Affairs          • Individual, Business, and
     Government Choices                                                                                                    Government Choices
   • Economic Systems              ECONOMICS                                 ECONOMICS                                   • Competitive Markets
                                   E1 The Market Economy                     E1 The Market Economy                       • Prices, Supply, and
 P Public Discourse,               E2 The National Economy                                                                 Demand
   Decision Making, and                                                      E2 The National Economy
                                   E3 International Economy                  E3 International Economy                    • Role of Government
   Citizen Involvement                                                                                                   • Economic
                                   PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND                      PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND                          Interdependence
                                   DECISION MAKING                           DECISION MAKING                           P Public Discourse,
                                                                                                                         Decision Making, and
                                                                                                                         Citizen Involvement




        GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                          V. 12/07           MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
      General Knowledge, Processes, and Skills for Grades 5-8 Social Studies
                                  Embedded in Grades 5- 8 standards and expectations

 K1      General Knowledge
        K1.1 Understand and analyze important temporal, spatial, political, and economic relationships, patterns,
             and trends.
        K1.2 Understand historical, geographical, political, and economic perspectives.
        K1.3 Understand the diversity of human beings and human cultures.
        K1.4 Analyze events and circumstances from the vantage point of others.
        K1.5 Understand social problems, social structure, institutions, class, groups, and interaction.
        K1.6 Apply social studies concepts to better understand major current local, national, and world events,
             issues, and problems.
        K1.7 Integrate concepts from at least two different social studies disciplines.
        K1.8 Understand significant concepts, principles, and theories of history, geography, civics, and economics as
             disciplines.

 P1     Reading and Communication – read and communicate effectively.
        P1.1 Use close and critical reading strategies to read and analyze texts pertaining to social science; attend
             to nuance, make connections to prior knowledge, draw inferences, and determine main idea and
             supporting details.
        P1.2 Analyze point of view, context, and bias to interpret primary and secondary source documents.
        P1.3 Understand that diversity of interpretation arises from frame of reference.
        P1.4 Communicate clearly and coherently in writing, speaking, and visually expressing ideas pertaining to
             social science topics, acknowledging audience and purpose.
        P1.5 Present a coherent thesis when making an argument, support with evidence, and present a concise,
             clear closing.

 P2      Inquiry, Research, and Analysis– critically examine evidence, thoughtfully consider conflicting claims,
        and carefully weigh facts and hypotheses.
        P2.1 Understand the scientific method of inquiry to investigate social scientific and historical problems.
        P2.2 Read and interpret data in tables and graphs.
        P2.3 Know how to find and organize information from a variety of sources, analyze, interpret, support
             interpretations with evidence, critically evaluate, and present the information orally and in writing;
             report investigation results effectively.
        P2.4 Use multiple perspectives and resources to identify and analyze issues appropriate to the social studies
             discipline being studied.
        P2.5 Use deductive and inductive problem-solving skills as appropriate to the problem being studied.

 P3      Public Discourse and Decision Making– engage in reasoned and informed decision making
        that should characterize each citizen’s participation in American society.
        P3.1 Clearly state an issue as a question of public policy, trace the origins of an issue, analyze various
             perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible alternative resolutions.
        P3.2 Deeply examine policy issues in group discussions and debates (clarify issues, consider opposing views,
             apply democratic values or constitutional principles, anticipate consequences) to make reasoned and
             informed decisions.
        P3.3 Write persuasive/argumentative essays expressing and justifying decisions on public policy issues.

 P4      Citizen Involvement
        P4.1 Act out of respect for the rule of law and hold others accountable to the same standard.
        P4.2 Demonstrate knowledge of how, when, and where individuals would plan and conduct activities
             intended to advance views on matters of public policy, report the results, and evaluate effectiveness.
        P4.3 Plan and conduct activities intended to advance views on matters of public policy, report the results,
             and evaluate effectiveness.

GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS             V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                 
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                              Grade Five

The fifth grade social studies content expectations mark a departure from the social studies approach taken in
previous grades. Building upon the geography, civics and government, and economics concepts of the United States
mastered in fourth grade and historical inquiry from earlier grades, the fifth grade expectations begin a more
discipline-centered approach concentrating on the early history of the United States. Students begin their study
of American history with American Indian peoples before the arrival of European explorers and conclude with the
adoption of the Bill of Rights in 1791. Although the content expectations are organized by historical era, they build
upon students’ understandings of the other social studies disciplines from earlier grades and require students to
apply these concepts within the context of American history.
Era 1: Beginnings to 1620
Beginning with pre-Columbian times, the expectations focus on American Indians living in North America before
European exploration.The geographic concepts of spatial awareness, places and regions, human systems, and human-
environment interactions are addressed throughout the era as students study American history to 1620.The
expectations deliberately expand upon students’ knowledge of American Indians living in Michigan and the concept of
regions from previous grades. In examining European exploration and conquest, the expectations embed geographic,
civics, and economic concepts, and revisit the case study method used by historians to explain the technological
and political developments that made exploration possible. In deepening understanding of perspective, students
also explore the goals, obstacles, motivations, and consequences of European exploration and the subsequent
colonization of the Americas. The expectations also include an introduction to life in Africa as a foundation for
examining interactions among Europeans,American Indians, and Africans from the 15th through the 17th centuries
with a focus on how economic concepts influenced the behavior of people and nations. Students apply the tools
of the historian by using primary and secondary sources to compare European and American Indian cultures, using
previously established criteria.The expectations also focus on the interaction among Europeans,American Indians,
and Africans, by exploring the impact of European contact on American Indian cultures, comparing the approaches
of the British and French in their interactions with American Indians, and examining the Columbian Exchange and its
impact on all three groups.
Era 2: Colonization and Settlement
In learning about the regional settlement patterns and significant developments of the three distinct colonial regions
prior to the American Revolution, students apply their conceptual understanding of regions and the geography
of the United States. They explore how the geography influenced peoples’ daily lives and economic activities as
three distinct colonial regions developed.The expectations require students to apply concepts of government
and economics to further understand the Southern, New England, and Middle colonies as they learn about the
establishment of colonial settlements, development of colonial governments, role of religion, relationships between
colonists and American Indians, and development of the institution of slavery. Using geography, students explore how
human systems such as religion, movement of people, and ethnic diversity led to the establishment of other colonies
within particular regions. Special attention is paid to the European slave trade and slavery in Colonial America as
students explore the lives of enslaved peoples and free Africans living in the American colonies. Fifth grade students
enhance their understanding of historical perspective by analyzing the perspectives of different groups living in
colonial America. By comparing the different colonial regions that developed with respect to politics, economics,
religion, social institutions, and human-environment interactions, the expectations prepare students for American
history in middle school serving as the precursor for the regional and racial issues that culminated in the Civil War.
Era 3: Revolution and the New Nation
In studying the American Revolution and the New Nation, the expectations deliberately build upon students’ prior
knowledge in government and economics.The political and economic aspects of the French and Indian War and
its aftermath are stressed. Students deepen their understanding of perspective by comparing patriot and loyalist
perspectives with respect to events that eventually culminated in the American Revolution.The expectations in this
historical era emphasize significant ideas about government as reflected in the Declaration of Independence and the
role of key individuals and groups in declaring independence. Students also apply concepts of power and authority
to the perspectives of the colonists and the British during the revolutionary era. Emphasis is placed on how colonial
experiences and ideas about government influenced the decision of the colonists to declare independence. Students
examine the course, character, and consequences of the American Revolution using geography and economics
students to compare the advantages and disadvantages of each side in the war. Students also describe the significant
events and turning points during the war. In examining the challenges faced by the new nation under the Articles of
Confederation, the expectations continue to build upon students’ understanding of government. By exploring the
political ideas underlying the Articles of Confederation and the subsequent adoption of the U.S. Constitution and
Bill of Rights (with particular emphasis on the rights contained in first four amendments), the values and principles

      GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS           V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
of American democracy are revisited through a historical context. Students examine how the Founders sought to
limit the power of government through principles of separation of powers, checks and balances, dual sovereignty
(federalism), protection of individual rights, popular sovereignty, and rule of law.
Public Discourse, Decision Making, and Citizen Involvement
The expectations continue to stress the importance of citizen action in a democratic republic as students expand
their ability to address public policy issues. Students address contemporary public issues related to the Constitution
and identify the related factual, definitional, and ethical questions.They use graphic data and other sources to analyze
information about the issue, evaluate alternative resolutions, and use core democratic values to explain why people
may differ on the resolution to a constitutional issue. Students are required to demonstrate increasing sophistication
in their abilities to communicate a position on more complex national public policy issue and support it with a
reasoned argument.


  INTEGRATED* UNITED STATES HISTORy ORGANIZED By ERA
   USHG ERA 1 – Beginnings to 1620
         1.1     American Indian Life in the Americas1
         1.2     European Exploration
         1.3     African Life Before the 16th Century
         1.4     Three World Interactions
   USHG ERA 2 – Colonization and Settlement (1585-1763)
         2.1     European Struggle for Control of North America
         2.2     European Slave Trade and Slavery in Colonial America
         2.3     Life in Colonial America
   USHG ERA 3 – Revolution and the New Nation (1754-1800)
         3.1     Causes of the American Revolution
         3.2     The American Revolution and its Consequences
         3.3     Creating New Governments and a New Constitution


   1
    Note: U.S. historians, history books, history standards, and the peoples themselves have used, at one time or another,“Native American”
   and “American Indian,” while Canadian history uses “First Peoples” to refer to inhabitants of North America prior to European exploration,
   conquest, and settlement.While we are using American Indians throughout the content expectations, students should be familiar with
   the different names and specific tribal identities as they will likely encounter variations over the course of their studies.


   *Geography, Civics and Government, and Economics are integrated into the historical context.



    National Geography Standards (National Geography Standards are referenced after expectations where appropriate)
    The World in Spatial Terms:                        Human Systems
    Geographical Habits of Mind                        9. Distribution and Migration of People
    1. Tools, Technology, and Information Processing   10. Cultural Mosaic
    2. Mental Maps                                     11. Economic Interdependence
    3. Spatial Organization on Earth’s                 12. Patterns of Human Settlement
                                                       13. Forces of Cooperation and Conflict
    Places and Regions
                                                       Environment and Society
    4. Physical and Human Characteristics of Place
    5. Creating Regions                                14. Human Modification of the Environment
    6. Perceptions of Places and Regions               15. How Physical Systems Affect Human Systems
                                                       16. Resource Use and Distribution
    Physical Systems
                                                       Uses of Geography
    7. Physical Processes
    8. Ecosystems                                      17. Using Geography to Interpret the Past
                                                       18. Using Geography to Interpret the Present
                                                           and Plan for the Future




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                          V. 12/07        MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                       7
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                Grade Five

U1 USHG ERA 1 – BEGINNINGS TO 1620

U1.1 American Indian Life in the Americas
     Describe the life of peoples living in North America before European exploration.
     5 – U1.1.1      Use maps to locate peoples in the desert Southwest, the Pacific Northwest, the nomadic nations
                     of the Great Plains, and the woodland peoples east of the Mississippi River (Eastern Woodland).
                     (National Geography Standard 1, p. 144)
     5 – U1.1.2      Compare how American Indians in the desert Southwest and the Pacific Northwest adapted to
                     or modified the environment. (National Geography Standard 14, p. 171)
     5 – U1.1.3      Describe Eastern Woodland American Indian life with respect to governmental and family
                     structures, trade, and views on property ownership and land use.
                     (National Geography Standard 11, p. 164, C, E)

U1.2 European Exploration
     Identify the causes and consequences of European exploration and colonization.
     5 – U1.2.1      Explain the technological (e.g., invention of the astrolabe and improved maps), and political
                     developments, (e.g., rise of nation-states), that made sea exploration possible.
                     (National Geography Standard 1, p. 144, C)
     5 – U1.2.2      Use case studies of individual explorers and stories of life in Europe to compare the goals,
                     obstacles, motivations, and consequences for European exploration and colonization of the
                     Americas (e.g., economic, political, cultural, and religious).
                     (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169, C, E)

U1.3 African Life Before the 16th Century
     Describe the lives of peoples living in western Africa prior to the 16th century.
     5 – U1.3.1      Use maps to locate the major regions of Africa (northern Africa, western Africa, central Africa,
                     eastern Africa, southern Africa). (National Geography Standard 1, p. 144)
     5 – U1.3.2      Describe the life and cultural development of people living in western Africa before the 16th
                     century with respect to economic (the ways people made a living) and family structures, and the
                     growth of states, towns, and trade. (National Geography Standard 10, p. 162)

U1.4 Three World Interactions
     Describe the environmental, political, and cultural consequences of the interactions among European,African, and
     American Indian peoples in the late 15th through the 17th century.
     5 – U1.4.1      Describe the convergence of Europeans,American Indians and Africans in North America after
                     1492 from the perspective of these three groups. (National Geography Standard 10, p. 162)
     5 – U1.4.2      Use primary and secondary sources (e.g., letters, diaries, maps, documents, narratives, pictures,
                     graphic data) to compare Europeans and American Indians who converged in the western
                     hemisphere after 1492 with respect to governmental structure, and views on property
                     ownership and land use. (National Geography Standard 12, p. 167, C, E)
     5 – U1.4.3      Explain the impact of European contact on American Indian cultures by comparing the different
                     approaches used by the British and French in their interactions with American Indians.
                     (National Geography Standard 10, p. 162, C, E)
     5 – U1.4.4      Describe the Columbian Exchange and its impact on Europeans,American Indians, and Africans.
                     (National Geography Standard 11, p. 164, E)




8   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                  V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                  Grade Five

U2    USHG ERA 2 – COLONIZATION AND SETTLEMENT (1585-1763)

U2.1 European Struggle for Control of North America
      Compare the regional settlement patterns and describe significant developments in Southern, New England, and
      the mid-Atlantic colonies.
      5 – U2.1.1     Describe significant developments in the Southern colonies, including
                     • patterns of settlement and control including the impact of geography (landforms and
                        climate) on settlement (National Geography Standard 12, p. 167)
                     • establishment of Jamestown (National Geography Standard 4, p. 150)
                     • development of one-crop economies (plantation land use and growing season for rice in
                        Carolinas and tobacco in Virginia) (National Geography Standard 11, p. 164)
                     • relationships with American Indians (e.g., Powhatan) (National Geography Standard 10, p. 162)
                     • development of colonial representative assemblies (House of Burgesses)
                        (National Geography Standard 5, p. 152)
                     • development of slavery
      5 – U2.1.2     Describe significant developments in the New England colonies, including
                     • patterns of settlement and control including the impact of geography (landforms and climate)
                        on settlement (National Geography Standard 12, p. 167)
                     • relations with American Indians (e.g., Pequot/King Phillip’s War) (National Geography Standard
                        10, p. 162)
                     • growth of agricultural (small farms) and non-agricultural (shipping, manufacturing) economies
                        (National Geography Standard 15, p. 173)
                     • the development of government including establishment of town meetings, development of
                        colonial legislatures and growth of royal government (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169)
                     • religious tensions in Massachusetts that led to the establishment of other colonies in
                        New England (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169 C, E)
      5 – U2.1.3     Describe significant developments in the Middle Colonies, including
                     • patterns of settlement and control including the impact of geography (landforms and climate)
                        on settlement (National Geography Standard 12, p. 167)
                     • the growth of Middle Colonies economies (e.g., breadbasket)
                        (National Geography Standard 7, p. 156)
                     • The Dutch settlements in New Netherlands, Quaker settlement in Pennsylvania, and
                        subsequent English takeover of the Middle Colonies
                     • immigration patterns leading to ethnic diversity in the Middle Colonies
                        (National Geography Standard 10, p. 162, C, E)
      5 – U2.1.4     Compare the regional settlement patterns of the Southern colonies, New England, and the
                     Middle Colonies. (National Geography Standard 12, p. 167)

U2.2 European Slave Trade and Slavery in Colonial America
      Analyze the development of the slave system in the Americas and its impact upon the life of Africans.
      5 – U2.2.1     Describe Triangular Trade including
                     • the trade routes
                     • the people and goods that were traded
                     • the Middle Passage
                     • its impact on life in Africa (National Geography Standards 9, and 11; pp. 160 and 164 E)

GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION        9
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                Grade Five

     5 – U2.2.2     Describe the life of enslaved Africans and free Africans in the American colonies.
                    (National Geography Standard 5, p. 152)
     5 – U2.2.3     Describe how Africans living in North America drew upon their African past (e.g., sense of
                    family, role of oral tradition) and adapted elements of new cultures to develop a distinct
                    African-American culture. (National Geography Standard 10, p. 162)

U2.3 Life in Colonial America
     Distinguish among and explain the reasons for regional differences in colonial America.
     5 – U2.3.1     Locate the New England, Middle, and Southern colonies on a map.
                    (National Geography Standard 3 p. 148)
     5 – U2.3.2     Describe the daily life of people living in the New England, Middle, and Southern colonies.
                    (National Geography Standards 14 and 15; pp. 171 and 173)
     5 – U2.3.3     Describe colonial life in America from the perspectives of at least three different groups of people
                    (e.g., wealthy landowners, farmers, merchants, indentured servants, laborers and the poor, women,
                    enslaved people, free Africans, and American Indians). (National Geography Standard 6, p. 154)
     5 – U2.3.4     Describe the development of the emerging labor force in the colonies (e.g., cash crop farming,
                    slavery, indentured servants). (E)
     5 – U2.3.5     Make generalizations about the reasons for regional differences in colonial America.
                    (National Geography Standard 6, p. 154)


U3 USHG ERA 3 REVOLUTION AND THE NEW NATION (1754 - 1800)

U3.1 Causes of the American Revolution
     Identify the major political, economic, and ideological reasons for the American Revolution.
     5 – U3.1.1     Describe the role of the French and Indian War, how British policy toward the colonies in
                    America changed from 1763 to 1775, and colonial dissatisfaction with the new policy.
                    (National Geography Standard 13 p. 169 C, E)
     5 – U3.1.2     Describe the causes and effects of events such as the Stamp Act, Boston Tea Party, the Intolerable
                    Acts, and the Boston Massacre.
     5 – U3.1.3     Using an event from the Revolutionary era (e.g., Boston Tea Party, quartering of soldiers, writs
                    of assistance, closing of colonial legislatures), explain how British and colonial views on authority
                    and the use of power without authority differed (views on representative government).
     5 – U3.1.4     Describe the role of the First and Second Continental Congress in unifying the colonies (addressing
                    the Intolerable Acts, declaring independence, drafting the Articles of Confederation). (C)
     5 – U3.1.5     Use the Declaration of Independence to explain why the colonists wanted to separate from
                    Great Britain and why they believed they had the right to do so. (C)
     5 – U3.1.6     Identify the role that key individuals played in leading the colonists to revolution, including
                    George Washington,Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin Franklin, Patrick Henry, Samuel Adams, John
                    Adams, and Thomas Paine.
     5 – U3.1.7     Describe how colonial experiences with self-government (e.g., Mayflower Compact, House
                    of Burgesses and town meetings) and ideas about government (e.g., purposes of government
                    such as protecting individual rights and promoting the common good, natural rights, limited
                    government, representative government) influenced the decision to declare independence. (C)
     5 – U3.1.8     Identify a problem confronting people in the colonies, identify alternative choices for addressing
                    the problem with possible consequences, and describe the course of action taken.




0   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                Grade Five

U3.2 The American Revolution and Its Consequences
      Explain the multi-faceted nature of the American Revolution and its consequences.
      5 – U3.2.1     Describe the advantages and disadvantages of each side during the American Revolution with
                     respect to military leadership, geography, types of resources, and incentives. (National Geography
                     Standard 4, p. 150, E)
      5 – U3.2.2     Describe the importance of Valley Forge, Battle of Saratoga, and Battle of Yorktown in the
                     American Revolution.
      5 – U3.2.3     Compare the role of women, African Americans, American Indians, and France in helping shape
                     the outcome of the war.
      5 – U3.2.4     Describe the significance of the Treaty of Paris (establishment of the United States and its
                     boundaries). (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169, C)

U3.3 Creating New Government(s) and a New Constitution
      Explain some of the challenges faced by the new nation under the Articles of Confederation, and analyze the
      development of the Constitution as a new plan for governing.
      5 – U3.3.1     Describe the powers of the national government and state governments under the Articles of
                     Confederation. (C)
      5 – U3.3.2     Give examples of problems the country faced under the Articles of Confederation (e.g., lack
                     of national army, competing currencies, reliance on state governments for money). (National
                     Geography Standard 13, p. 169, C)
      5 – U3.3.3     Explain why the Constitutional Convention was convened and why the Constitution was written.
                     (C)
      5 – U3.3.4     Describe the issues over representation and slavery the Framers faced at the Constitutional
                     Convention and how they were addressed in the Constitution (Great Compromise,Three-
                     Fifths Compromise). (National Geography Standard 9, p. 160, C)
      5 – U3.3.5     Give reasons why the Framers wanted to limit the power of government (e.g., fear of a strong
                     executive, representative government, importance of individual rights). (C)
      5 – U3.3.6     Describe the principle of federalism and how it is expressed through the sharing and distribution
                     of power as stated in the Constitution (e.g., enumerated and reserved powers). (C)
      5 – U3.3.7     Describe the concern that some people had about individual rights and why the inclusion of a
                     Bill of Rights was needed for ratification. (C)
      5 – U3.3.8     Describe the rights found in the First, Second,Third, and Fourth Amendments to the United
                     States Constitution.




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION         1
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                    Grade Five

PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)

P3.1 Identifying and Analyzing Public Issues
      Clearly state a problem as public policy issue, analyze various perspectives, and generate and evaluate possible
      alternative resolutions.
      5 – P3.1.1      Identify contemporary public issues related to the United States Constitution and their related
                      factual, definitional, and ethical questions.
      5 – P3.1.2      Use graphic data and other sources to analyze information about a contemporary public issue
                      related to the United States Constitution and evaluate alternative resolutions.
      5 – P3.1.3      Give examples of how conflicts over core democratic values lead people to differ on
                      contemporary constitutional issues in the United States.

P3.3 Persuasive Communication About a Public Issue
      Communicate a reasoned position on a public issue.
      5 – P3.3.1      Compose a short essay expressing a position on a contemporary public policy issue related to
                      the Constitution and justify the position with a reasoned argument.

P4.2 Citizen Involvement
      Act constructively to further the public good.
      5 – P4.2.1      Develop and implement an action plan and know how, when, and where to address or inform
                      others about a public issue.
      5 – P4.2.2      Participate in projects to help or inform others.




   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
Organization of Western and Eastern Hemisphere Studies
in Grades Six and Seven
The study of the Western and Eastern Hemispheres during ancient and modern times, is the content of grades six and seven.
Instruction over these two years includes geography, economics, government, inquiry, public discourse and decision making,
citizen involvement, and World History and Geography - Eras 1, 2, and 3.These components may be arranged over the two
years with the understanding that all grade level content expectations for 6 and 7 must be included in the plan for instruction.
An approach which integrates the study of the ancient world and a present day context for geography, economics, and government
of both hemispheres requires careful planning. As of the writing of this document, grade level testing is not currently planned for
social studies, therefore,districts are afforded flexibility on the organizational delivery models for the content in grades 6 and 7.
The charts below illustrate organizational options for how those studies might be scheduled for delivery to students.
The first chart illustrates options for an integrated course of study, called Western and Eastern Hemisphere Studies, in the sixth
and seventh grades.This model infuses ancient world history into a regional Western and Eastern Hemisphere organization.The
difference between the options shown in this chart is the number of weeks devoted to specific topics. Notice that the shaded
columns show the number of weeks used in the first year to supplement the teaching of Eastern Hemisphere Studies. The
three options shown are only examples. A local school district may adopt another, such as spending 27 weeks on Western
Hemisphere Studies. It should also be noted that a district may wish to offer the Eastern Hemisphere Studies in sixth grade and
Western Hemisphere Studies in seventh grade.

Examples of Organization for Grades Six and Seven by Hemisphere

  Western Hemisphere Studies                                            Eastern Hemisphere Studies
 Number      The World     The World in    Contemporary Global        Number         Number             The World       The World in    Contemporary Global
 of Weeks    in Temporal   Spatial Terms   Civics and   Issues Past   of Weeks       of Weeks           in Temporal     Spatial Terms   Civics and   Issues Past
 of Study    Terms         Overview and    Economics of and Present   Remaining to of Study             Terms           Overview and    Economics of and Present
             Overview and Geography        the Western                Begin Teaching                    Overview and    Geography       the Eastern
             History of    of Western      Hemisphere                 the Eastern                       History of      of Eastern      Hemisphere
             Ancient       Hemisphere                                 Hemisphere                        Ancient         Hemisphere
             Civilizations                                                                              Civilizations
             of Western                                                                                 of Eastern
             Hemisphere                                                                                 Hemisphere


  1 year =     7 weeks       19 weeks        5 weeks      5 weeks       0 weeks         1 year =         12 weeks        16 weeks          3 weeks       5 weeks
  36 weeks                                                                              36 weeks


                                                                                          48 weeks
  24 weeks     7 weeks       11 weeks         2 weeks     4 weeks       12 weeks         ( 36 weeks      17 weeks        22 weeks          3 weeks       6 weeks
                                                                                        +12 weeks
                                                                                       from Grade 6)

                                                                                         44 weeks
  28 weeks     7 weeks       14 weeks        3 weeks      4 weeks       8 weeks        ( 36 weeks +      15 weeks        20 weeks          3 weeks       6 weeks
                                                                                          8 weeks
                                                                                       from Grade 6)



This next chart shows an example of how a local district might decide to divide the content by discipline with one year of ancient
world history and one year of world geography. Again, all 6th and 7th Grade Level Content Expectations must be included in this
discipline-based organizational delivery model.

Example of Organization for Grades Six and Seven by Content Discipline

  Ancient World Studies                                                                                World Geography Studies
 Number      The World     Ancient         Ancient      Contemporary Global            Number           The World in Geography of       Geography of   Global
 of Weeks    in Temporal   History         History      Civics/       Issues Past      of Weeks         Spatial Terms the Eastern       the Western    Issues Past
 of Study    Terms         of Eastern      of Western   Government    and Present      of Study                       Hemisphere        Hemisphere     and Present
                           Hemisphere      Hemisphere   and Economics




  36 weeks     2 weeks      15 weeks         9 weeks      4 weeks       6 weeks         36 weeks         2 weeks         19 weeks         9 weeks        6 weeks




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                             V. 12/07              MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                               
An Overview of Western and Eastern Hemisphere Studies
The World in Temporal Terms – Historical Habits of Mind
(Included in Grade 6 as a foundation for Grade 7)
Students will identify the conceptual devices to organize their study of the world.They will compare cultural and
historical interpretation.They will use the process of reasoning based on evidence from the past and interpret a
variety of historical documents recognizing fact from opinion and seeking multiple historical perspectives and will
evaluate evidence, compare and contrast information, interpret the historical record, and develop sound historical
arguments and perspectives on which informed decisions in contemporary life can be based.

WHG Era 1 – The Beginnings of Human Society: Beginnings to 4000 B.C.E./B.C.
Students will explain the basic features and differences between hunter-gatherer societies and pastoral nomads.
Analyze and explain the geographic, environmental, biological, and cultural processes that influenced the rise of
the earliest human communities, the migration and spread of people throughout the world, and the causes and
consequences of the growth of agriculture.

WHG Era 2 – Early Civilizations and Cultures and the Emergence of Pastoral Peoples,
4000 to 1000 B.C.E./B.C.
Students will describe and differentiate defining characteristics of early civilizations.

WHG Era 3 – Classical Traditions,World Religions, and Major Empires, 1000 B.C.E./B.C.
to 300 C.E./A.D.
(Grades six and seven includes World History to 300 C.E./A.D.)
Students will analyze the innovations and social, political, and economic changes that occurred through emergence
of classical civilizations in the major regions of the world, including the establishment of five major world religions.

The World in Spatial Terms – Geographical Habits of Mind
(Included in Grade 6 as a foundation for Grade 7)
Students will study the relationships between people, places, and environments by using information that is in a
geographic (spatial) context.They will engage in mapping and analyzing the information to explain the patterns
and relationships they reveal both between and among people, their cultures, and the natural environment.They
will identify and access information, evaluate it using criteria based on concepts and themes, and use geography in
problem solving and decision making. Students will explain and use key conceptual devices (places and regions,
spatial patterns and processes) that geographers use to organize information and inform their study of the world.

Places and Regions
Students will describe the cultural groups and diversities among people that are rooted in particular places and in
human constructs called regions.They will analyze the physical and human characteristics of places and regions.

Physical Systems
Students will describe the physical processes that shape the Earth’s surface which, along with plants and animals, are
the basis for both sustaining and modifying ecosystems.They will identify and analyze the patterns and characteristics
of the major ecosystems on Earth.

Human Systems
Students will explain that human activities help shape Earth’s surface, human settlements and structures are part
of Earth’s surface, and humans compete for control of Earth’s surface.They will study human populations, cultural
mosaics, economic interdependence, human settlement, and cooperation.

Environment and Society
Students will explain that the physical environment is modified by human activities, which are influenced by the ways
in which human societies value and use Earth’s natural resources, and by Earth’s physical features and processes.They
will explain how human action modifies the physical environment and how physical systems affect human systems.




      GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  An Overview of Western and Eastern Hemisphere Studies – continued


Global Issues Past and Present (Capstone Projects, G6)
The challenges of the 21st century require students to be globally literate regarding major global issues and the
processes necessary to inquire about issues, gather information, and make decisions that arise during their lifetimes.
They will need to practice responsible citizenship and make informed and reasoned decisions for the public good in a
pluralistic, democratic society and an interdependent world.

Throughout the school year, the students will be introduced to topics that address global issues that integrate time
and place.The topics are important for understanding contemporary global issues that affect countries and regions.
Regular experiences with those topics and issues are necessary during each grade in order to build the background
students will require to complete in-depth capstone projects.

A capstone project entails the investigation of historical and contemporary global issues that have significance for the
student and are clearly linked to the world outside the classroom. Students use technology and traditional sources
to collect data that they develop into a product or performance that clearly demonstrates their proficiency in apply­
ing content from the core disciplines.They use public discourse, decision making, and citizen involvement in complet­
ing and presenting the capstone.The students demonstrate inquiry methods and compose persuasive civic essays
using reasoned arguments.The capstone project proposes a plan for the future based on the evidence researched. At
least three global issues should be used in capstone projects at each grade level.

Purposes of Government
Students will analyze how people identify, organize, and accomplish the purposes of government.

Structure and Functions of Government
Students will describe the major activities of government including making and enforcing laws, providing services and
benefits to individuals and groups, assigning individual and collective responsibilities, generating revenue, and providing
national security.

Relationship of United States to Other Nations and World Affairs
Students will explain that the world is organized politically into nation-states, and how nation-states interact with
one another.

The Market Economy
Students will describe the market economy in terms of relevance of limited resources, how individuals and
institutions make and evaluate decisions, the role of incentives, how buyers and sellers interact to create markets,
how markets allocate resources, and the economic role of government in a market economy.

The National Economy
Students will use economic concepts, terminology, and data to identify and describe how a national economy
functions.They will study the role of government as a provider of goods and services within a national economy.

The International Economy
Students will analyze reasons for individuals and businesses to specialize and trade, why individuals and businesses
trade across international borders, and the comparisons of the benefits and costs of specialization and the resulting
trade for consumers, producers, and governments.

Public Discourse, Decision Making, Citizen Involvement
Students will identify and analyze public policy issues, express and justify decisions, and develop an action plan to
inform others.



 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION              
     Western Hemisphere Studies                                                               Grade Six
Sixth grade students will explore the tools and mental constructs used by historians and geographers.They
will develop an understanding of Ancient World History, Eras 1 – 3, of the Western Hemisphere and will study
contemporary geography of the Western Hemisphere. Contemporary civics/government and economics content is
integrated throughout the year. As a capstone, the students will conduct investigations about past and present global
issues. Using significant content knowledge, research, and inquiry, they will analyze an issue and propose a plan for the
future. As part of the inquiry, they compose civic, persuasive essays using reasoned argument.


      HISTORy
      H1 The World in Temporal Terms: Historical Habits of Mind (Foundational for Grade 7)
          1.1 Temporal Thinking
          1.2 Historical Inquiry and Analysis
          1.4 Historical Understanding
      W1 WHG Era 1 – The Beginnings of Human Society
           1.1 Peopling of the Earth
           1.2 Agricultural Revolution
      W2 WHG Era 2 – Early Civilizations and Cultures and the Emergence of Pastoral Peoples
           2.1 Early Civilizations and Early Pastoral Societies
      W3 WHG Era 3 – Classical Traditions,World Religions, and Major Empires
           3.1 Classical Traditions and Major Empires in the Western Hemisphere
      GEOGRAPHy
      G1 The World in Spatial Terms: Geographical Habits of Mind (Foundational for Grade 7)
           1.1 Spatial Thinking
           1.2 Geographical Inquiry and Analysis
           1.3 Geographical Understanding
      G2 Places and Regions
           2.1 Physical Characteristics of Place
           2.2 Human Characteristics of Place
      G3 Physical Systems
           3.1 Physical Processes
           3.2 Ecosystems
      G4 Human Systems
           4.1 Cultural Mosaic
           4.2 Technology Patterns and Networks
           4.3 Patterns of Human Settlement
           4.4 Forces of Cooperation and Conflict
      G5 Environment and Society
           5.1 Humans and the Environment
           5.2 Physical and Human Systems
      G6 Global Issues Past and Present
           6.1 Global Topic Investigation and Issue Analysis
      CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
      C1 Purposes of Government
           1.1 Nature of Civic Life, Politics, and Government
      C3 Structure and Functions of Government
           3.6 Characteristics of Nation-States
      C4 Relationship of United States to Other Nations and World Affairs
           4.3 Conflict and Cooperation Between and Among Nations
      ECONOMICS
      E1 The Market Economy
           1.1 Individual, Business, and Government Choices
      E2 The National Economy
           2.3 Role of Government
      E3 International Economy
           3.1 Economic Systems
           3.3 Economic Interdependence
      PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIzEN INVOLVEMENT

     GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS            V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
   Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                      Grade Six

6TH GRADE WESTERN HEMISPHERE STUDIES
Sixth Grade includes North America, Central America, the Caribbean, and South America. Europe and Russia are listed
in the document in grade 7, but may be included with either Western or Eastern Hemisphere Studies. World History
Eras 1, 2, and 3 are included in Grades 6 and 7 as a foundation for High School World History and Geography.

Note:The World in Temporal Terms and The World in Spatial Terms become foundational expectations for the 7th Grade study
of the Eastern Hemisphere.

HISTORy
H1       THE WORLD IN TEMPORAL TERMS: HISTORICAL HABITS OF MIND
        (WAyS OF THINKING)
        Evaluate evidence, compare and contrast information, interpret the historical record, and develop sound historical
        arguments and perspectives on which informed decisions in contemporary life can be based.
H1.1 Temporal Thinking
        Use historical conceptual devices to organize and study the past.
        Historians use conceptual devices (eras, periods, calendars, time lines) to organize their study of the world.
        Chronology is based on time and reflects cultural and historical interpretations, including major starting points,
        and calendars based on different criteria (religious, seasonal, Earth-sun-and-moon relationships). Historians use
        eras and periods to organize the study of broad developments that have involved large segments of world’s
        population and have lasting significance for future generations and to explain change and continuity.
        6 – H1.1.1      Explain why and how historians use eras and periods as constructs to organize and explain
                        human activities over time.
        6 – H1.1.2      Compare and contrast several different calendar systems used in the past and present and
                        their cultural significance (e.g., Olmec and Mayan calendar systems, Aztec Calendar Stone, Sun
                        Dial, Gregorian calendar – B.C./A.D.; contemporary secular – B.C.E./C.E. Note: in 7th grade
                        Eastern Hemisphere the Chinese, Hebrew, and Islamic/Hijri calendars are included).

H1.2 Historical Inquiry and Analysis
        Use historical inquiry and analysis to study the past.
        History is a process of reasoning based on evidence from the past. Historians use and interpret a variety of
        historical documents (including narratives), recognize the difference between fact and opinion, appreciate multiple
        historical perspectives while avoiding present mindedness (judging the past solely in term of norms and values of
        today), and explain that historical events often are the result of multiple causation. Students will conduct their own
        inquiry and analysis in their studies about the ancient history of the Western Hemisphere.
        6 – H1.2.1      Explain how historians use a variety of sources to explore the past (e.g., artifacts, primary
                        and secondary sources including narratives, technology, historical maps, visual/mathematical
                        quantitative data, radiocarbon dating, DNA analysis).
        6 – H1.2.2      Read and comprehend a historical passage to identify basic factual knowledge and the literal
                        meaning by indicating who was involved, what happened, where it happened, what events led to
                        the development, and what consequences or outcomes followed.
        6 – H1.2.3      Identify the point of view (perspective of the author) and context when reading and discussing
                        primary and secondary sources.
        6 – H1.2.4      Compare and evaluate competing historical perspectives about the past based on proof.
        6 – H1.2.5      Identify the role of the individual in history and the significance of one person’s ideas.




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                  V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION               7
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                   Grade Six


H1.4 Historical Understanding
        Use historical concepts, patterns, and themes to study the past.
        Historians apply temporal perspective, historical inquiry, and analysis to spheres of human society to construct
        knowledge as historical understandings.These understandings are drawn from the record of human history and
        include human aspirations, strivings, accomplishments, and failures in spheres of human activity.
        6 – H1.4.1      Describe and use cultural institutions to study an era and a region (political, economic, religion/
                        belief, science/technology, written language, education, family).
        6 – H1.4.2      Describe and use themes of history to study patterns of change and continuity.
        6 – H1.4.3      Use historical perspective to analyze global issues faced by humans long ago and today.


W1      WHG ERA 1 – THE BEGINNINGS OF HUMAN SOCIETy:
        BEGINNINGS TO 4000 B.C.E./B.C.
        Explain the basic features and differences between hunter-gatherer societies and pastoral nomads. Analyze and
        explain the geographic, environmental, biological, and cultural processes that influenced the rise of the earliest human
        communities, the migration and spread of people throughout the world, and the causes and consequences of the growth
        of agriculture.

W1.1 Peopling of the Earth
        Describe the spread of people in the Western Hemisphere in Era 1.
        In the first era of human history, people spread throughout the world. As communities of hunters, foragers,
        or fishers, they adapted creatively and continually to a variety of contrasting, changing environments in the
        Americas.
        6 – W1.1.1      Describe the early migrations of people among Earth’s continents (including the Berringa Land
                        Bridge).
        6 – W1.1.2      Examine the lives of hunting and gathering people during the earliest eras of human society
                        (tools and weapons, language, fire).

W1.2 Agricultural Revolution
        Describe the Agricultural Revolution and explain why it is a turning point in history.
        The Agricultural Revolution was a major turning point in history that resulted in people and civilizations
        viewing and using the land in a systematic manner to grow food crops, raise animals, produce food surpluses,
        and the development of sedentary settlement.
        6 – W1.2.1      Describe the transition from hunter gatherers to sedentary agriculture (domestication of plants
                        and animals).
        6 – W1.2.2      Describe the importance of the natural environment in the development of agricultural
                        settlements in different locations (e.g., available water for irrigation, adequate precipitation, and
                        suitable growing season).
        6 – W1.2.3      Explain the impact of the Agricultural Revolution (stable food supply, surplus, population growth,
                        trade, division of labor, development of settlements).




8      GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                  V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                          Grade Six

W2     WHG ERA 2 – EARLy CIVILIZATIONS AND CULTURES AND THE
      EMERGENCE OF PASTORAL PEOPLES, 4000 TO 1000 B.C.E./B.C.
      Describe and differentiate defining characteristics of early civilization and pastoral societies, where they emerged, and
      how they spread.

W2.1 Early Civilizations and Early Pastoral Societies
      Describe the characteristics of early Western Hemisphere civilizations and pastoral societies.
      During this era early agrarian civilizations and pastoral societies emerged. Many of the world’s most fundamental
      institutions, discoveries, inventions, and techniques appeared. Pastoral societies developed cultures that reflected the
      geography and resources that enabled them to inhabit the more challenging physical environments such as the tundra
      and semi-arid regions of North and South America.
      6 – W2.1.1      Explain how the environment favored hunter gatherer, pastoral, and small scale agricultural
                      ways of life in different parts of the Western Hemisphere.
      6 – W2.1.2      Describe how the invention of agriculture led to the emergence of agrarian civilizations
                      (seasonal harvests, specialized crops, cultivation, and development of villages and towns).
      6 – W2.1.3      Use multiple sources of evidence to describe how the culture of early peoples of North America
                      reflected the geography and natural resources available (e.g., Inuit of the Arctic, Kwakiutl of the
                      Northwest Coast; Anasazi and Apache of the Southwest).
      6 – W2.1.4      Use evidence to identify defining characteristics of early civilizations and early pastoral nomads
                      (government, language, religion, social structure, technology, and division of labor).

W3    WHG ERA 3 – CLASSICAL TRADITIONS AND MAjOR EMPIRES,
      1000 B.C.E./B.C. TO 300 C.E./A.D.
      (Note: Mayan, Aztec, and Incan societies had their beginnings in Era 3 but became more prominent as civilizations in Era 4.)
      Analyze the civilizations and empires that emerged during this era, noting their political, economic, and social systems,
      and their changing interactions with the environment.
      Analyze the innovations and social, political, and economic changes that occurred through the emergence of agrarian
      societies of Mesoamerica and Andean South America and the subsequent urbanization and trading economies that
      occurred in the region. (Grade 6)

W3.1 Classical Traditions and Major Empires in the Western Hemisphere
      Describe empires and agrarian civilizations in Mesoamerica and South America.
      Civilizations and empires that emerged during this era were noted for their political, economic and social
      systems and their changing interactions with the environment and the agrarian civilizations that emerged in
      Mesoamerica and South America.
      6 – W3.1.1      Analyze the role of environment in the development of early empires, referencing both useful
                      environmental features and those that presented obstacles.
      6 – W3.1.2      Explain the role of economics in shaping the development of early civilizations (trade routes and
                      their significance – Inca Road, supply and demand for products).
      6 – W3.1.3      Describe similarities and difference among Mayan, Aztec, and Incan societies, including economy,
                      religion, and role and class structure.
      6 – W3.1.4      Describe the regional struggles and changes in governmental systems among the Mayan, Aztec,
                      and Incan Empires.
      6 – W3.1.5      Construct a timeline of main events on the origin and development of early and classic ancient
                      civilizations of the Western Hemisphere (Olmec, Mayan, Aztec, and Incan).



GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                  V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                   9
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                   Grade Six


GEOGRAPHy
G1      THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS: GEOGRAPHICAL HABITS OF MIND
        Describe the relationships between people, places, and environments by using information that is in a geographic
        (spatial) context. Engage in mapping and analyzing the information to explain the patterns and relationships they reveal
        both between and among people, their cultures, and the natural environment. Identify and access information, evaluate
        it using criteria based on concepts and themes, and use geography in problem solving and decision making. Explain
        and use key conceptual devices (places and regions, spatial patterns and processes) that geographers use to organize
        information and inform their study of the world.

G1.1 Spatial Thinking
        Use maps and other geographic tools to acquire and process information from a spatial perspective.
        Geographers use published maps, sketch (mental) maps, and other geographic representations, tools, and
        technologies to acquire, organize, process, and report information from a spatial perspective.World maps
        made for specific purposes (population distribution, climate patterns, vegetation patterns) are used to
        explain the importance of maps in presenting information that can be compared, contrasted, and examined
        to answer the questions “Where is something located?” and “Why is it located there?” Students will begin
        with global scale and then refocus the scale to study the region of the Western Hemisphere, and,
        finally, focus on a specific place.
        6 – G1.1.1     Describe how geographers use mapping to represent places and natural and human phenomena
                       in the world.
        6 – G1.1.2     Draw a sketch map from memory of the Western Hemisphere showing the major regions
                       (Canada, United States, Mexico, Central America, South America, and Caribbean).

G1.2 Geographical Inquiry and Analysis
        Use geographic inquiry and analysis to answer important questions about relationships between people, cultures, their
        environment, and relations within the larger world context.
        Geographers use information and skills to reach conclusions about significant questions regarding the relationships
        between people, their cultures, the environments in which they live, and the relationships within the larger
        world context. Students will reach their own conclusions using this information and make a reasoned
        judgment about the most justifiable conclusion based on the authenticity of the information, their skill at
        critically analyzing the information, and presenting the results of the inquiry.
        6 – G1.2.1     Locate the major landforms, rivers (Amazon, Mississippi, Missouri, Colorado), and climate regions
                       of the Western Hemisphere.
        6 – G1.2.2     Explain why maps of the same place may vary, including cultural perspectives of the Earth and
                       new knowledge based on science and modern technology.
        6 – G1.2.3     Use data to create thematic maps and graphs showing patterns of population, physical terrain,
                       rainfall, and vegetation, analyze the patterns and then propose two generalizations about the
                       location and density of the population.
        6 – G1.2.4     Use observations from air photos, photographs (print and CD), films (VCR and DVD) as the
                       basis for answering geographic questions about the human and physical characteristics of places
                       and regions.




0     GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                    Grade Six

      6 – G1.2.5     Use information from modern technology such as Geographic Positioning System (GPS),
                     Geographic Information System (GIS), and satellite remote sensing to locate information and
                     process maps and data to analyze spatial patterns of the Western Hemisphere to answer
                     geographic questions.
      6 – G1.2.6     Apply the skills of geographic inquiry (asking geographic questions, acquiring geographic
                     information, organizing geographic information, analyzing geographic information, and answering
                     geographic questions) to analyze a problem or issue of importance to a region of the Western
                     Hemisphere.
G1.3 Geographical Understanding
      Use geographic themes, knowledge about processes and concepts to study the Earth.
      The nature and uses of geography as a discipline and the spatial perspective require that students observe,
      interpret, assess, and apply geographic information and skills.The uses of the subject and content of geography
      are essential in the development of geographical understanding. A spatial perspective enables student to observe,
      describe, and analyze the organizations of people, places, and environments at different scales and is central to
      geographic literacy.
      6 – G1.3.1     Use the fundamental themes of geography (location, place, human environment interaction,
                     movement, region) to describe regions or places on earth.
      6 – G1.3.2     Explain the locations and distributions of physical and human characteristics of Earth by using
                     knowledge of spatial patterns.
      6 – G1.3.3     Explain the different ways in which places are connected and how those connections
                     demonstrate interdependence and accessibility.

G2    PLACES AND REGIONS
      Describe the cultural groups and diversities among people that are rooted in particular places and in human constructs
      called regions.Analyze the physical and human characteristics of places and regions.

G2.1 Physical Characteristics of Place
      Describe the physical characteristics of places.
      6 – G2.1.1     Describe the landform features and the climate of the region (within the Western or Eastern
                     Hemispheres) under study.
      6 – G2.1.2     Account for topographic and human spatial patterns (where people live) associated with
                     tectonic plates such as volcanoes, earthquakes, settlements (Ring of Fire, recent volcanic and
                     seismic events, settlements in proximity to natural hazards in the Western Hemisphere) by using
                     information from GIS, remote sensing, and the World Wide Web.

G2.2 Human Characteristics of Place
      Describe the human characteristics of places.
      6 – G2.2.1     Describe the human characteristics of the region under study (including languages, religion,
                     economic system, governmental system, cultural traditions).
      6 – G2.2.2     Explain that communities are affected positively or negatively by changes in technology
                     (e.g., Canada with regard to mining, forestry, hydroelectric power generation, agriculture,
                     snowmobiles, cell phones, air travel).
      6 – G2.2.3     Analyze how culture and experience influence people’s perception of places and regions
                     (e.g., the Caribbean Region that presently displays enduring impacts of different immigrant
                     groups – Africans, South Asians, Europeans – and the differing contemporary points of view
                     about the region displayed by islanders and tourists).




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION               1
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                   Grade Six


G3   PHySICAL SySTEMS
     Describe the physical processes that shape the Earth’s surface which, along with plants and animals, are the basis for
     both sustaining and modifying ecosystems. Identify and analyze the patterns and characteristics of the major ecosystems
     on Earth.

G3.1 Physical Processes
     Describe the physical processes that shape the patterns of the Earth’s surface.
     6 – G3.1.1     Construct and analyze climate graphs for two locations at different latitudes and elevations
                    in the region to answer geographic questions and make predictions based on patterns. (e.g.,
                    compare and contrast Buenos Aires and La Paz; Mexico City and Guatemala City; Edmonton and
                    Toronto).

G3.2 Ecosystems
     Describe the characteristics and spatial distribution of ecosystems on the Earth’s surface.
     6 – G3.2.1     Explain how and why ecosystems differ as a consequence of differences in latitude, elevation,
                    and human activities (e.g., South America’s location relative to the equator, effects of elevations on
                    temperature and growing season, proximity to bodies of water and the effects on temperature
                    and rainfall, effects of annual flooding on vegetation along river flood plains such as the Amazon).
     6 – G3.2.2     Identify ecosystems and explain why some are more attractive for humans to use than are
                    others (e.g., mid-latitude forest in North America, high latitude of Peru, tropical forests in
                    Honduras, fish or marine vegetation in coastal zones).


G4   HUMAN SySTEMS
     Explain that human activities may be seen on Earth’s surface.
     Human systems include the way people divide the land, decide where to live, develop communities that are part of
     the larger cultural mosaic, and engage in the cultural diffusion of ideas and products within and among groups.

G4.1 Cultural Mosaic
     Describe the characteristics, distribution and complexity of Earth’s cultural mosaic.
     6 – G4.1.1     Identify and explain examples of cultural diffusion within the Americas (e.g., baseball, soccer,
                    music, architecture, television, languages, health care, Internet, consumer brands, currency,
                    restaurants, international migration).

G4.2 Technology Patterns and Networks
     Describe how technology creates patterns and networks that connect people, products, and ideas.
     6 – G4.2.1     List and describe the advantages and disadvantages of different technologies used to move
                    people, products, and ideas throughout the world (e.g., call centers in the Eastern Hemisphere
                    that service the Western Hemisphere; the United States and Canada as hubs for the Internet;
                    transport of people and perishable products; and the spread of individuals’ ideas as voice and
                    image messages on electronic networks such as the Internet).




   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                       Grade Six

G4.3 Patterns of Human Settlement
        Describe patterns, processes, and functions of human settlement.
        6 – G4.3.1     Identify places in the Western Hemisphere that have been modified to be suitable for settlement
                       by describing the modifications that were necessary (e.g., Vancouver in Canada; irrigated
                       agriculture; or clearing of forests for farmland).
        6 – G4.3.2     Describe patterns of settlement by using historical and modern maps (e.g., coastal and river
                       cities and towns in the past and present, locations of megacities – modern cities over 5 million,
                       such as Mexico City, and patterns of agricultural settlements in South and North America).

G4.4 Forces of Cooperation and Conflict
        Explain how forces of conflict and cooperation among people influence the division of the Earth’s surface and its
        resources.
        6 – G4.4.1     Identify factors that contribute to conflict and cooperation between and among cultural groups
                       (control/use of natural resources, power, wealth, and cultural diversity).
        6 – G4.4.2     Describe the cultural clash of First Peoples, French and English in Canada long ago, and the
                       establishment of Nunavut in 1999.


G5      ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETy
        Explain that the physical environment is modified by human activities, which are influenced by the ways in which human
        societies value and use Earth’s natural resources, and by Earth’s physical features and processes. Explain how human
        action modifies the physical environment and how physical systems affect human systems.

G5.1 Humans and the Environment
        Describe how human actions modify the environment.
        6 – G5.1.1     Describe the environmental effects of human action on the atmosphere (air), biosphere (people,
                       animals, and plants), lithosphere (soil), and hydrosphere (water) (e.g., changes in the tropical
                       forest environments in Brazil, Peru, and Costa Rica).
        6 – G5.1.2     Describe how variations in technology affect human modifications of the landscape
                       (e.g., clearing forests for agricultural land in South America, fishing in the Grand Banks of the
                       Atlantic, expansion of cities in South America, hydroelectric developments in Canada, Brazil and
                       Chile, and mining the Kentucky and West Virginia).
        6 – G5.1.3     Identify the ways in which human-induced changes in the physical environment in one place can
                       cause changes in other places (e.g., cutting forests in one region may result in river basin flooding
                       elsewhere; building a dam floods land upstream and may permit irrigation in another region).

G5.2 Physical and Human Systems
      Describe how physical and human systems shape patterns on the Earth’s surface.
        6– G5.2.1      Describe the effects that a change in the physical environment could have on human activities and
                       the choices people would have to make in adjusting to the change (e.g., drought in northern Mexico,
                       disappearance of forest vegetation in the Amazon, natural hazards and disasters from volcanic
                       eruptions in Central America and the Caribbean and earthquakes in Mexico City and Colombia).




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION              
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                      Grade Six


G6    GLOBAL ISSUES PAST AND PRESENT (H1.4.3, G1.2.6)
      Throughout the school year the students are introduced to topics that address global issues that integrate time and
      place. Included are capstone projects that entail the investigation of historical and contemporary global issues that have
      significance for the student and are clearly linked to the world outside the classroom.The topics and issues are developed
      as capstone projects within units and at the end of the course. Regular experiences with those topics and issues are
      necessary during each grade in order to build the background students will require to complete in-depth capstone
      projects.

G6.1 Global Topic Investigation and Issue Analysis (P2)
      Capstone projects require the student to use geography, history, economics, and government to inquire about
      major contemporary and historical issues and events linked to the world outside the classroom.The core
      disciplines are used to interpret the past and plan for the future. During the school year the students will
      complete at least three capstone projects. (National Geography Standards 17 and 18, p. 179 and 181)
      6 – G6.1.1     Contemporary Investigations – Conduct research on contemporary global topics and issues,
                     compose persuasive essays, and develop a plan for action. (H1.4.3, G1.2.6, See P3 and P4)

      Contemporary Investigation Topics
      Global Climate Change – Investigate the impact of global climate change and describe the significance for
      human/environment relationships.
      Globalization – Investigate the significance of globalization and describe its impact on international economic
      and political relationships.
      Migration – Investigate issues arising from international movement of people and the economic, political, and
      cultural consequences.
      Human-Environmental Interactions – Investigate how policies from the past and their implemantation
      have had positive or negative consequences for the environment in the future.
      Natural Disasters – Investigate the significance of natural disasters and describe the effects on human and
      physical systems, and the economy, and the responsibilities of government.
      6 – G6.1.2     Investigations Designed for Ancient World History Eras – Conduct research on global
                     topics and issues, compose persuasive essays, and develop a plan for action.
                     (H1.4.3, G1.2.6, See P3 and P4)
                     Note: Additional global investigation topics have been identified for connections to World
                     History Eras 1, 2, and 3 studies. Students investigate contemporary topics and issues that they
                     have studied in an ancient world history context.The investigations may be addressed at the
                     conclusion of each Era or may be included at the conclusion of the course.

     Contemporary Investigation Topics – Related to Content in World History
     and Contemporary Geography
      WHG Era 1
      Population Growth and Resources – Investigate how population growth affects resource availability.
      Migration – Investigate the significance of migrations of peoples and the resulting benefits and challenges.
      WHG Era 2
      Sustainable Agriculture – Investigate the significance of sustainable agriculture and its role in helping societies
      produce enough food for people.
      WHG Era 3
      Development – Investigate economic effects on development in a region and its ecosystems and societies.

   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                        Grade Six


CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT

C1      PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT
       Analyze how people identify, organize, and accomplish the purposes of government.

C1.1 Nature of Civic Life, Politics, and Government
       Describe Civic Life, Politics, and Government and explain their relationships.
       6 – C1.1.1      Analyze competing ideas about the purposes government should serve in a democracy and in a
                       dictatorship (e.g., protecting individual rights, promoting the common good, providing economic
                       security, molding the character of citizens, or promoting a particular religion).


C3      STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT
       Describe the major activities of government, including making and enforcing laws, providing services and benefits to
       individuals and groups, assigning individual and collective responsibilities, generating revenue, and providing national
       security.

C3.6 Characteristics of Nation-States
       Describe the characteristics of nation-states and how they may interact.
       6 – C3.6.1      Define the characteristics of a nation-state (a specific territory, clearly defined boundaries,
                       citizens, and jurisdiction over people who reside there, laws, and government), and how
                       Western Hemisphere nations interact.
       6 – C3.6.2      Compare and contrast a military dictatorship such as Cuba, a presidential system
                       of representative democracy such as the United States, and a parliamentary system of
                       representative democracy such as Canada.


C4     RELATIONSHIP OF UNITED STATES TO OTHER NATIONS
       AND WORLD AFFAIRS
       Explain that nations interact with one another through trade, diplomacy, treaties and agreements, humanitarian aid,
       economic sanctions and incentives, and military force, and threat of force.


C4.3 Conflict and Cooperation Between and Among Nations
       Explain the various ways that nations interact both positively and negatively.
       6 – C4.3.1      Explain the geopolitical relationships between countries (e.g., petroleum and arms purchases in
                       Venezuela and Ecuador; foreign aid for health care in Nicaragua).
       6 – C4.3.2      Explain the challenges to governments and the cooperation needed to address international
                       issues in the Western Hemisphere (e.g., migration and human rights).
       6 – C4.3.3      Give examples of how countries work together for mutual benefits through international
                       organizations (e.g. North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), Organization of American
                       States (OAS), United Nations (UN)).




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                  V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                   
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                   Grade Six

ECONOMICS
E1   THE MARKET ECONOMy
     Describe the market economy in terms of the relevance of limited resources, how individuals and institutions make
     and evaluate decisions, the role of incentives, how buyers and sellers interact to create markets, how markets allocate
     resources, and the economic role of government in a market economy.

E1.1 Individual, Business, and Government Choices
     Describe how individuals, businesses and government make economic decisions when confronting scarcity in the
     market economy .
     6 – E1.1.1     Explain how incentives vary in different economic systems (e.g. acquiring money, profit, goods,
                    wanting to avoid loss in position in society, job placement).


E2   THE NATIONAL ECONOMy
     Use economic concepts, terminology, and data to identify and describe how a national economy functions and to study
     the role of government as a provider of goods and services within a national economy.

E2.3 Role of Government
     Describe how national governments make decisions that affect the national economy
     6 – E2.3.1     Describe the impact of governmental policy (sanctions, tariffs, treaties) on that country and on
                    other countries that use its resources.


E3   INTERNATIONAL ECONOMy
     Analyze reasons for individuals and businesses to specialize and trade, why individuals and businesses trade across
     international borders, and the comparisons of the benefits and costs of specialization and the resulting trade for
     consumers, producers, and governments.

E3.1 Economic Interdependence
     Describe patterns and networks of economic interdependence, including trade.
     6 – E3.1.1     Use charts and graphs to compare imports and exports of different countries in the Western
                    Hemisphere and propose generalizations about patterns of economic interdependence.
     6 – E3.1.2     Diagram or map the movement of a consumer product from where it is manufactured to where
                    it is sold to demonstrate the flow of materials, labor, and capital (e.g., global supply chain for
                    computers, athletic shoes, and clothing).
     6 – E3.1.3     Explain how communications innovations have affected economic interactions and where and
                    how people work (e.g., internet-based home offices, international work teams, international
                    companies).

E3.3 Economic Systems
     Describe how societies organize to allocate resources to produce and distribute goods and services.
     6 – E3.3.1    Explain and compare how economic systems (traditional, command, and market) answer four basic
                   questions: What should be produced? How will it be produced? How will it be distributed? Who will
                   receive the benefits of production? (e.g., compare United States and Cuba, orVenezuela and Jamaica.)




   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                    Grade Six

PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)

P3.1   Identifying and Analyzing Issues, Decision Making, Persuasive Communication
       About a Public Issue, and Citizen Involvement
       6 – P3.1.1      Clearly state an issue as a question or public policy, trace the origins of an issue, analyze various
                       perspectives, and generate and evaluate alternative resolutions. Deeply examine policy issues
                       in group discussions and debates to make reasoned and informed decisions.Write persuasive/
                       argumentative essays expressing and justifying decisions on public policy issues. Plan and conduct
                       activities intended to advance views on matters of public policy, report the results, and evaluate
                       effectiveness.
                       • Identify public policy issues related to global topics and issues studied.
                       • Clearly state the issue as a question of public policy orally or in written form.
                       • Use inquiry methods to acquire content knowledge and appropriate data about the issue.
                       • Identify the causes and consequences and analyze the impact, both positive and negative.
                       •   Share and discuss findings of research and issue analysis in group discussions and debates.
                       •   Compose a persuasive essay justifying the position with a reasoned argument.
                       •   Develop an action plan to address or inform others about the issue at the local to global
                           scales.

P4.2   Citizen Involvement
       Act constructively to further the public good.
       6 – P4.2.1      Demonstrate knowledge of how, when, and where individuals would plan and conduct
                       activities intended to advance views in matters of public policy, report the results, and evaluate
                       effectiveness.
       6 – P4.2.2      Engage in activities intended to contribute to solving a national or international problem studied.
       6 – P4.2.3      Participate in projects to help or inform others (e.g., service learning projects).




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION              7
     Eastern Hemisphere Studies                                                      Grade Seven
Seventh grade students will review the tools and mental constructs used by historians and geographers.They
will develop an understanding of Ancient World History, Eras 1 – 3, of the Eastern Hemisphere and will study
contemporary geography of the Eastern Hemisphere. Contemporary civics/government and economics content
is integrated throughout the year. As a capstone, the students will conduct investigations about past and present
global issues. Using significant content knowledge, research, and inquiry, they will analyze the issue and propose
a plan for the future. As part of the inquiry, they compose civic, persuasive essays using reasoned argument.

     HISTORy
     H1 The World in Temporal Terms: Historical Habits of Mind (Foundational Expectations Addressed in Grade 6)
          1.1 Temporal Thinking
          1.2 Historical Inquiry and Analysis
          1.4 Historical Understanding
     W1 WHG Era 1 – The Beginnings of Human Society
          1.1 Peopling of the Earth
          1.2 Agricultural Revolution
     W2 WHG Era 2 – Early Civilizations and Cultures and the Emergence of Pastoral Peoples
          2.1 Early Civilizations and Early Pastoral Societies
     W3 WHG Era 3 – Classical Traditions,World Religions, and Major Empires
          3.1 Classical Traditions in Regions of the Eastern Hemisphere
          3.2 Growth and Development of World Religions
     GEOGRAPHy
     G1 The World in Spatial Terms: Geographical Habits of Mind (Foundational Expectations Addressed in Grade 6)
          1.1 Spatial Thinking
          1.2 Geographical Inquiry and Analysis
          1.3 Geographical Understanding
     G2 Places and Regions
          2.1 Physical Characteristics of Place
          2.2 Human Characteristics of Place
     G3 Physical Systems
          3.1 Physical Processes
          3.2 Ecosystems
     G4 Human Systems
          4.1 Cultural Mosaic
          4.2 Technology Patterns and Networks
          4.3 Patterns of Human Settlement
          4.4 Forces of Cooperation and Conflict
     G5 Environment and Society
          5.1 Humans and the Environment
          5.2 Physical and Human Systems
     G6 Global Issues Past and Present
          6.1 Global Topic Investigation and Issue Analysis
     CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT
     C1 Purposes of Government
          1.1 Nature of Civic Life, Politics, and Government
     C3 Structure and Functions of Government
          3.6 Characteristics of Nation-States
     C4 Relationship of United States to Other Nations and World Affairs
          4.3 Conflict and Cooperation Between and Among Nations
     ECONOMICS
     E1 The Market Economy
          1.1 Individual, Business, and Government Choices
     E2 The National Economy
          2.3 Role of Government
     E3 International Economy
          3.1 Economic Systems
          3.3 Economic Interdependence
     PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING,AND CITIzEN INVOLVEMENT


8       GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS        V. 12/07    MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                     Grade Seven

7TH GRADE EASTERN HEMISPHERE STUDIES
Seventh Grade includes Europe,Africa,Asia, and Australia. Europe and Russia are listed in the document for 7th grade,
but may be included with either Western or Eastern Hemisphere Studies.World History Eras 1, 2, and 3 and The
World in Temporal Terms and The World in Spatial Terms are included in Grades 6 and 7 as a foundation for World
History and Geography in the high school. Capstone projects of historical and contemporary global issues that have
significance for the student and clearly linked to the world outside the classroom are included.

HISTORy
H1       THE WORLD IN TEMPORAL TERMS: HISTORICAL HABITS OF MIND
        (FOUNDATIONAL ExPECTATIONS ADDRESSED IN GRADE 6)
        Evaluate evidence, compare and contrast information, interpret the historical record, and develop sound historical
        arguments and perspectives on which informed decisions in contemporary life can be based.

H1.1 Temporal Thinking
        Use historical conceptual devices to organize and study the past.
        Historians use conceptual devices (eras, periods, calendars, time lines) to organize their study of the world.
        Chronology is based on time and reflects cultural and historical interpretations, including major starting points,
        and calendars based on different criteria (religious, seasonal, Earth-sun-and-moon relationships). Historians use
        eras and periods to organize the study of broad developments that have involved large segments of world’s
        population and have lasting significance for future generations and to explain change and continuity.
        7 – H1.1.1      Explain why and how historians use eras and periods as constructs to organize and explain
                        human activities over time.
        7 – H1.1.2      Compare and contrast several different calendar systems used in the past and present and
                        their cultural significance (e.g., Sun Dial, Gregorian calendar – B.C./A.D.; contemporary secular
                        – B.C.E./C.E.; Chinese, Hebrew, and Islamic/Hijri calendars).

H1.2 Historical Inquiry and Analysis
        Use historical inquiry and analysis to study the past.
        History is a process of reasoning based on evidence from the past. Historians use and interpret a variety of
        historical documents (including narratives), recognize the difference between fact and opinion, appreciate multiple
        historical perspectives while avoiding present mindedness (judging the past solely in term of norms and values of
        today), and explain that historical events often are the result of multiple causation. Students will conduct their
        own inquiry and analysis in their studies about the ancient history of the Eastern Hemisphere.
        7 – H1.2.1      Explain how historians use a variety of sources to explore the past (e.g., artifacts, primary
                        and secondary sources including narratives, technology, historical maps, visual/mathematical
                        quantitative data, radiocarbon dating, DNA analysis).
        7 – H1.2.2      Read and comprehend a historical passage to identify basic factual knowledge and the literal
                        meaning by indicating who was involved, what happened, where it happened, what events led to
                        the development, and what consequences or outcomes followed.
        7 – H1.2.3      Identify the point of view (perspective of the author) and context when reading and discussing
                        primary and secondary sources.
        7 – H1.2.4      Compare and evaluate competing historical perspectives about the past based on proof.
        7 – H1.2.5      Describe how historians use methods of inquiry to identify cause effect relationships in history
                        noting that many have multiple causes.
        7 – H1.2.6      Identify the role of the individual in history and the significance of one person’s ideas.




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                  V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION               9
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                Grade Seven

H1.4 Historical Understanding
     Use historical concepts, patterns, and themes to study the past.
     Historians apply temporal perspective, historical inquiry, and analysis to spheres of human society to construct
     knowledge as historical understandings.These understandings are drawn from the record of human history and
     include human aspirations, strivings, accomplishments, and failures in spheres of human activity.
     7 – H1.4.1     Describe and use cultural institutions to study an era and a region (political, economic, religion/
                    belief, science/technology, written language, education, family).
     7 – H1.4.2     Describe and use themes of history to study patterns of change and continuity.
     7 – H1.4.3     Use historical perspectives to analyze global issues faced by humans long ago and today.


W1   WHG ERA 1 – THE BEGINNINGS OF HUMAN SOCIETy:
     BEGINNINGS TO 4000 B.C.E./B.C.
     Explain the basic features and differences between hunter-gatherer societies and pastoral nomads. Analyze and
     explain the geographic, environmental, biological, and cultural processes that influenced the rise of the earliest
     human communities, the migration and spread of people throughout the world, and the causes and consequences of
     the growth of agriculture.
W1.1 Peopling of the Earth
     Describe the spread of people in the Eastern Hemisphere in Era 1.
     In the first era of human history, people spread throughout the world. As communities of hunters, foragers,
     or fishers, they adapted creatively and continually to a variety of contrasting, changing environments in Africa,
     Eurasia, and Australia.
     7 – W1.1.1     Explain how and when human communities populated major regions of the Eastern Hemisphere
                    (Africa, Australia, Europe, Asia) and adapted to a variety of environments.
     7 – W1.1.2     Explain what archaeologists have learned about Paleolithic and Neolithic patterns of living in
                    Africa,Western Europe, and Asia.

W1.2 Agricultural Revolution
     Describe the Agricultural Revolution and explain why it was a turning point in history.
     The Agricultural Revolution was a major turning point in history that resulted in people and civilizations viewing
     and using the land in a systematic manner to grow food crops, raise animals, produce food surpluses, and the
     development of sedentary settlement.
     7 – W1.2.1     Explain the importance of the natural environment in the development of agricultural
                    settlements in different locations (e.g., available water for irrigation, adequate precipitation, and
                    suitable growth season).
     7 – W1.2.2     Explain the impact of the Agricultural Revolution (stable food supply, surplus, population growth,
                    trade, division of labor, development of settlements).
     7 – W1.2.3     Compare and contrast the environmental, economic, and social institutions of two early
                    civilizations from different world regions (e.g.,Yangtse, Indus River Valley,Tigris/Euphrates, and Nile).




0   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                    Grade Seven

W2     WHG ERA 2 – EARLy CIVILIZATIONS AND CULTURES AND THE
      EMERGENCE OF PASTORAL PEOPLES, 4000 TO 1000 B.C.E./B.C.
      Describe and differentiate defining characteristics of early civilization and pastoral societies, where they emerged, and
      how they spread.

W2.1 Early Civilizations and Early Pastoral Societies
      Analyze early Eastern Hemisphere civilizations and pastoral societies.
      During this era early civilizations and pastoral societies emerged. Many of the world’s most fundamental
      institutions, discoveries, inventions, and techniques appeared. Pastoral societies developed the herding of
      animals as a primary food source that enabled them to inhabit the semi-arid steppes of Eurasia and Africa.This
      era introduces students to one of the most enduring themes in history: the dynamic interplay, between herding
      and agrarian societies involving both conflict and mutual dependence.
      7 – W2.1.1     Describe the importance of the development of human language, oral and written, and its
                     relationship to the development of culture
                     • verbal vocalizations
                     • standardization of physical (rock, bird) and abstract (love, fear) words
                     • pictographs to abstract writing (governmental administration, laws, codes, history and
                         artistic expressions)
      7 – W2.1.2     Use historical and modern maps and other sources to locate, describe, and analyze major river
                     systems and discuss the ways these physical settings supported permanent settlements, and
                     development of early civilizations (Tigris and Euphrates Rivers,Yangtze River, Nile River, Indus River).
      7 – W2.1.3     Examine early civilizations to describe their common features (ways of governing, stable food
                     supply, economic and social structures, use of resources and technology, division of labor and
                     forms of communication).
      7 – W2.1.4     Define the concept of cultural diffusion and how it resulted in the spread of ideas and
                     technology from one region to another (e.g., plants, crops, plow, wheel, bronze metallurgy).
      7 – W2.1.5     Describe pastoralism and explain how the climate and geography of Central Asia were linked to
                     the rise of pastoral societies on the steppes.




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07        MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                   1
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                    Grade Seven

W3   WHG ERA 3 – CLASSICAL TRADITIONS, WORLD RELIGIONS, AND
     MAjOR EMPIRES, 1000 B.C.E./B.C. TO 300 C.E./A.D.
     Analyze classical civilizations and empires and the emergence of major world religions and large-scale empires.
     During this era, innovations and social, political, and economic changes occurred through emergence of
     classical civilizations in Africa and Eurasia. Africa and Eurasia moved in the direction of forming a single world
     of human interchange as a result of trade, empire building, and the diffusion of skills and ideas. Six of the
     world’s major faiths and ethical systems emerged and classical civilizations established institutions, systems of
     thought, and cultural styles that would influence neighboring peoples and endure for centuries.

W3.1 Classical Traditions in Regions of the Eastern Hemisphere
     Analyze classical civilizations and empires and their lasting impact on institutions, political thought, structures, technology
     and art forms that grew in India, China, the Mediterranean basin,Africa, and Southwest and Central Asia during this era.
     7 – W3.1.1      Describe the characteristics that classical civilizations share (institutions, cultural styles, systems
                     of thought that influenced neighboring peoples and have endured for several centuries).
     7 – W3.1.2      Using historic and modern maps, locate three major empires of this era, describe their
                     geographic characteristics including physical features and climates, and propose a generalization
                     about the relationship between geographic characteristics and the development of early empires.
     7– W3.1.3       Compare and contrast the defining characteristics of a city-state, civilization, and empire.
     7 – W3.1.4      Assess the importance of Greek ideas about democracy and citizenship in the development of
                     Western political thought and institutions.
     7 – W3.1.5      Describe major achievements from Indian, Chinese, Mediterranean,African, and Southwest and
                     Central Asian civilizations in the areas of art, architecture and culture; science, technology and
                     mathematics; political life and ideas; philosophy and ethical beliefs; and military strategy.
     7 – W3.1.6      Use historic and modern maps to locate and describe trade networks among empires in the
                     classical era.
     7 – W3.1.7      Use a case study to describe how trade integrated cultures and influenced the economy within
                     empires (e.g.,Assyrian and Persian trade networks or networks of Egypt and Nubia/Kush; or
                     Phoenician and Greek networks).
     7 – W3.1.8      Describe the role of state authority, military power, taxation systems, and institutions of coerced
                     labor, including slavery, in building and maintaining empires (e.g., Han Empire, Mauryan Empire,
                     Egypt, Greek city-states and the Roman Empire).
     7 – W3.1.9  Describe the significance of legal codes, belief systems, written languages and communications in
                 the development of large regional empires.
     7 – W3.1.10 Create a time line that illustrates the rise and fall of classical empires during the classical period.

W3.2 Growth and Development of World Religions
     Explain how world religions or belief systems of Hinduism, Judaism, Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism and Islam grew
     and their significance. (Islam is included here even though it came after 300 C.E./A.D.)
     Six of the world’s major faiths and ethical systems emerged establishing institutions, systems of thought, and
     cultural styles that would influence neighboring peoples and endure for centuries.
     7 – W3.2.1      Identify and describe the beliefs of the five major world religions.
     7 – W3.2.2      Locate the geographical center of major religions and map the spread through the
                     3rd century C.E./A.D.
     7 – W3.2.3      Identify and describe the ways that religions unified people’s perceptions of the world and
                     contributed to cultural integration of large regions of Afro-Eurasia.
                     (National Geography Standard 6, p. 73)

   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                   V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                  Grade Seven


GEOGRAPHy
G1     THE WORLD IN SPATIAL TERMS: GEOGRAPHICAL HABITS OF MIND
      (FOUNDATIONAL ExPECTATIONS ADDRESSED IN GRADE 6)
      Study the relationships between people, places, and environments by using information that is in a geographic (spatial)
      context. Engage in mapping and analyzing the information to explain the patterns and relationships they reveal both
      between and among people, their cultures, and the natural environment. Identify and access information, evaluate
      it using criteria based on concepts and themes, and use geography in problem solving and decision making. Explain
      and use key conceptual devices (places and regions, spatial patterns and processes) that geographers use to organize
      information and inform their study of the world.

G1.1 Spatial Thinking
      Use maps and other geographic tools to acquire and process information from a spatial perspective.
      Geographers use published maps, sketch (mental) maps, and other geographic representations, tools, and
      technologies to acquire, organize, process, and report information from a spatial perspective.World maps made
      for specific purposes (population distribution, climate patterns, vegetation patterns) are used to explain the
      importance of maps in presenting information that can be compared, contrasted, and examined to answer the
      questions “Where is something located?” and “Why is it located there?” Students will begin with global scale
      and then refocus the scale to study the region of the Eastern Hemisphere, and, finally, focus on a specific place.
      7 – G1.1.1     Explain and use a variety of maps, globes, and web based geography technology to study the
                     world, including global, interregional, regional, and local scales.
      7 – G1.1.2     Draw an accurate sketch map from memory of the Eastern Hemisphere showing the major
                     regions (Africa,Asia, Europe,Australia/Oceania,Antarctica).

G1.2 Geographical Inquiry and Analysis
      Use geographic inquiry and analysis to answer important questions about relationships between people, cultures, their
      environment, and relations within the larger world context.
      Geographers use information and skills to reach conclusions about significant questions regarding the
      relationships between people, their cultures, the environments in which they live, and the relationships
      within the larger world context. Students will reach their own conclusions using this information and make a
      reasoned judgment about the most justifiable conclusion based on the authenticity of the information, their
      skill at critically analyzing and synthesizing the information, and presenting the results of the inquiry.
      7 – G1.2.1     Locate the major landforms, rivers and climate regions of the Eastern Hemisphere.
      7 – G1.2.2     Explain why maps of the same place may vary as a result of the cultural or historical background
                     of the cartographer.
      7 – G1.2.3     Use observations from air photos, photographs (print and CD), films (VCR and DVD) as the
                     basis for answering geographic questions about the human and physical characteristics of places
                     and regions.
      7 – G1.2.4     Draw the general population distribution of the Eastern Hemisphere on a map, analyze the
                     patterns, and propose two generalizations about the location and density of the population.
      7 – G1.2.5     Use information from modern technology such as Geographic Positioning System (GPS),
                     Geographic Information System (GIS), and satellite remote sensing to locate information
                     and process maps and data to analyze spatial patterns of the Eastern Hemisphere to answer
                     geographic questions.
      7 – G1.2.6     Apply the skills of geographic inquiry (asking geographic questions, acquiring geographic
                     information, organizing geographic information, analyzing geographic information, and answering
                     geographic questions) to analyze a problem or issue of importance to a region of the Eastern
                     Hemisphere.

 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                  
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                Grade Seven

G1.3 Geographical Understanding
      Use geographic themes, knowledge about processes and concepts to study the Earth.
      The nature and uses of geography as a discipline and the spatial perspective require that students observe,
      interpret, assess, and apply geographic information and skills.The uses of the subject and content of geography
      are essential in the development of geographical understanding. A spatial perspective enables students to
      observe, describe, and analyze the organizations of people, places, and environments at different scales and is
      central to geographic literacy.
      7 – G1.3.1     Use the fundamental themes of geography (location, place, human environment interaction,
                     movement, region) to describe regions or places on earth.
      7 – G1.3.2     Explain the locations and distributions of physical and human characteristics of Earth by using
                     knowledge of spatial patterns.
      7 – G1.3.3     Explain the different ways in which places are connected and how those connections
                     demonstrate interdependence and accessibility.


G2    PLACES AND REGIONS
      Describe the cultural groups and diversities among people that are rooted in particular places and in human constructs
      called regions. Analyze the physical and human characteristics of places and regions.

G2.1 Physical Characteristics of Place
      Describe the physical characteristics of places.
      7 – G2.1.1     Describe the landform features and the climate of the region (within the Western or Eastern
                     Hemispheres) under study.
      7 – G2.1.2     Use information from GIS, remote sensing and the World Wide Web to compare and contrast
                     the surface features and vegetation of the continents of the Eastern Hemisphere.

G2.2 Human Characteristics of Place
      Describe the human characteristics of places.
      7 – G2.2.1     Describe the human characteristics of the region under study (including languages, religion,
                     economic system, governmental system, cultural traditions).
      7 – G2.2.2     Explain that communities are affected positively or negatively by changes in technology
                     (e.g., increased manufacturing resulting in rural to urban migration in China, increased farming
                     of fish, hydroelectric power generation at Three Gorges, pollution resulting from increased
                     manufacturing and automobiles).
      7 – G2.2.3     Analyze how culture and experience influence people’s perception of places and regions (e.g., that
                     beaches are places where tourists travel, cities have historic buildings, northern places are cold,
                     equatorial places are very warm).


G3    PHySICAL SySTEMS
      Describe the physical processes that shape the Earth’s surface which, along with plants and animals, are the basis
      for both sustaining and modifying ecosystems. Identify and analyze the patterns and characteristics of the major
      ecosystems on Earth.

G3.1 Physical Processes
      Describe the physical processes that shape the patterns of the Earth’s surface.
      7 – G3.1.1     Construct and analyze climate graphs for locations at different latitudes and elevations in the
                     region to answer geographic questions and make predictions based on patterns (e.g., compare and
                     contrast Norway and France; Nairobi and Kilimanjaro; Mumbai and New Delhi).
   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                      Grade Seven

G3.2 Ecosystems
      Describe the characteristics and spatial distribution of ecosystems on the Earth’s surface.
      The characteristics of major ecosystems on Earth’s surface include forests, deserts, grasslands, mountains, high
      latitude/polar and the temperature and precipitation patterns that cause them.
      7 – G3.2.1     Explain how and why ecosystems differ as a consequence of differences in latitude, elevation, and
                     human activities (e.g., effects of latitude on types of vegetation in Africa, proximity to bodies of water
                     in Europe, and effects of annual river flooding in Southeast Asia and China).
      7 – G3.2.2     Identify ecosystems of a continent and explain why some provide greater opportunities (fertile soil,
                     precipitation) for humans to use than do other ecosystems and how that changes with technology
                     (e.g., China’s humid east and arid west and the effects of irrigation technology).

G4    HUMAN SySTEMS
      Explain that human activities may be seen on Earth’s surface. Human systems include the way people divide the land,
      decide where to live, develop communities that are part of the larger cultural mosaic, and engage in the cultural diffusion
      of ideas and products within and among groups.

G4.1 Cultural Mosaic
      Describe the characteristics, distribution and complexity of Earth’s cultural mosaic.
      People are central to the study of geography.The characteristics, distribution, and complexity of human cultures
      create a cultural mosaic.
      7 – G4.1.1     Identify and explain examples of cultural diffusion within the Eastern Hemisphere (e.g., the spread of
                     sports, music, architecture, television, Internet, Bantu languages in Africa, Islam in Western Europe).
      7 – G4.1.2     Compare roles of women in traditional African societies in the past with roles of women as modern
                     micro-entrepreneurs in current economies.

G4.2 Technology Patterns and Networks
      Describe how technology creates patterns and networks that connect people, products and ideas.
      Technology affects the patterns and networks that develop on Earth and that enable people, products, and ideas
      to be exchanged.
      7 – G4.2.1     List and describe the advantages and disadvantages of different technologies used to move people,
                     products, and ideas throughout the world (e.g., opportunities for employment, entrepreneurial
                     and educational opportunities using the Internet; the effects of technology on reducing the
                     time necessary for communications and travel; the uses and effects of wireless technology in
                     developing countries; and the spread of group and individual’s ideas as voice and image messages
                     on electronic networks such as the Internet).

G4.3 Patterns of Human Settlement
      Describe patterns, processes and functions of human settlement.
      Human settlements have a powerful influence in shaping the world’s different cultural mosaics and political and
      economic systems. Patterns of settlement are shaped by trade, the movement of raw materials, finished products,
      people, and ideas (scientific, technological, religious).
      7 – G4.3.1     Identify places in the Eastern Hemisphere that have been modified to be suitable for settlement by
                     describing the modifications that were necessary (e.g., Nile River irrigation, reclamation of land along
                     the North Sea, planting trees in areas that have become desertified in Africa).
      7 – G4.3.2     Describe patterns of settlement by using historical and modern maps (e.g., the location of
                     the world’s mega cities, other cities located near coasts and navigable rivers, regions under
                     environmental stress such as the Sahel).

 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                  Grade Seven

G4.4 Forces of Cooperation and Conflict
     Explain how forces of conflict and cooperation among people influence the division and control of the Earth’s surface.
     Forces of cooperation and conflict divide Earth’s space and involve the control of land, resources, strategic
     routes, and domination of other peoples.
     7 – G4.4.1     Identify and explain factors that contribute to conflict and cooperation between and among
                    cultural groups (e.g., natural resources, power, culture, wealth).
     7 – G4.4.2     Describe examples of cooperation and conflict within the European Union (e.g., European Parliament,
                    Euro as currency in some countries but not others, open migration within the European Union, free
                    trade, and cultural impacts such as a multi-lingual population).


G5   ENVIRONMENT AND SOCIETy
     Explain that the physical environment is modified by human activities, which are influenced by the ways in which human
     societies value and use Earth’s natural resources, and by Earth’s physical features and processes. Explain how human
     action modifies the physical environment and how physical systems affect human systems.

G5.1 Humans and the Environment
     Describe how human actions modify the environment.
     7 – G5.1.1     Describe the environmental effects of human action on the atmosphere (air), biosphere (people,
                    animals, and plants), lithosphere (soil), and hydrosphere (water) (e.g., desertification in the Sahel
                    Region of North Africa, deforestation in the Congo Basin, air pollution in urban center, and
                    chemical spills in European Rivers).
     7 – G5.1.2     Describe how variations in technology affect human modifications of the landscape (e.g., clearing
                    of agricultural land in Southeast Asia, fish factories in North Atlantic and Western Pacific Ocean,
                    and damming rivers to meet needs for electricity).
     7 – G5.1.3     Identify the ways in which human-induced changes in the physical environment in one place can
                    cause changes in other places (e.g., cutting forests in one region may result in river basin flooding
                    elsewhere as has happened historically in China; building dams floods land upstream and permits
                    irrigation downstream as in Southern Africa, the Aswan Dam flooded the upper Nile Valley and
                    permitted irrigation downstream).

G5.2 Physical and Human Systems
     Describe how physical and human systems shape patterns on the Earth’s surface.
     7 – G5.2.1     Describe the effects that a change in the physical environment could have on human activities and
                    the choices people would have to make in adjusting to the change (e.g., drought in Africa, pollution
                    from volcanic eruptions in Indonesia, earthquakes in Turkey, and flooding in Bangladesh).




   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                 V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                 Grade Seven

G6    GLOBAL ISSUES PAST AND PRESENT (H1.4.3, G1.2.6)
      Throughout the school year the students are introduced to topics that address global issues that integrate time and
      place. Included are capstone projects that entail the investigation of historical and contemporary global issues that
      have significance for the student and are clearly linked to the world outside the classroom.The topics and issues are
      developed as capstone projects within units and at the end of the course. Regular experiences with those topics and
      issues are necessary during each grade in order to build the background students will require to complete in-depth
      capstone projects.

G6.1 Public Discourse, Decision Making, and Citizen Involvement (P3, P4)
      Capstone projects require the student to use geography, history, economics, and government to inquire about
      major contemporary and historical issues and events linked to the world outside the classroom.The core
      disciplines are used to interpret the past and plan for the future. During the school year the students will
      complete at least three capstone projects. (National Geography Standards 17 and 18, p. 179 and 181)

      7 – G6.1.1     Contemporary Investigations – Conduct research on contemporary global topics and issues,
                     compose persuasive essays, and develop a plan for action. (H1.4.3, G1.2.6, See P3 and P4)

      Contemporary Investigation Topics
      Conflict, Stability, and Change – Investigate the significance of conflict, stability, and change in governmental
      systems within the region.
      Diversity and Nationalism – Investigate the tensions that may develop between cultural diversity and
      nationalism within a country and their consequences.
      Urbanization – Investigate urbanization and its consequences for the world’s population.
      Oil and Society – Investigate the significance of how oil has changed nations as both consumers and producers
      of this natural resource.
      Children in the World – Investigate issues affecting children such as health, labor, and war.
      Regional Cooperation – Explain the significance of and barriers to regional cooperation.

      7 – G6.1.2     Investigations Designed for Ancient World History Eras – Conduct research on global
                     topics and issues, compose persuasive essays, and develop a plan for action.
                     (H1.4.3, G1.2.6, See P3 and P4)
                     Note:Additional global investigation topics have been identified for connections to World
                     History Eras 1, 2, and 3 studies. Students investigate contemporary topics and issues that they
                     have studied in an ancient world history context.The investigations may be addressed at the
                     conclusion of each Era or may be included at the conclusion of the course.
     Contemporary Investigation Topics – Related to Content in World History
     and Contemporary Geography
      WHG Era 1
      Population Growth and Resources – Investigate how population growth affects resource availability.
      Migration – Investigate the significance of migrations of peoples and the resulting benefits and challenges.
      WHG Era 2
      Sustainable Agriculture – Investigate the significance of sustainable agriculture and its role in helping societies
      produce enough food for people.
      WHG Era 3
      Development – Investigate economic effects on development in a region and its ecosystems and societies.
      Religious Conflict – Investigate conflict that arises from varying religious beliefs.
GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                  7
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                 Grade Seven

CIVICS AND GOVERNMENT

C1    PURPOSES OF GOVERNMENT
     Analyze how people identify, organize, and accomplish the purposes of government.

C1.1 Nature of Civic Life, Politics, and Government
     Describe civic life, politics and government and explain their relationships.
     Political scientists analyze why people engage in the political process; the role citizens play in civic life; the
     concepts of power, authority, sovereignty, and legitimacy; and competing arguments about the purpose and
     necessity of government.
     7 – C1.1.1      Explain how the purposes served by government affect relationships between the individual,
                     government, and society as a whole and the differences that occur in monarchies, theocracies,
                     dictatorships, and representative governments.


C3    STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT
     Explain that governments are structured to serve the people. Describe the major activities of government, including
     making and enforcing laws, providing services and benefits to individuals and groups, assigning individual and collective
     responsibilities, generating revenue, and providing national security.

C3.6 Characteristics of Nation-States
     Describe the characteristics of nation-states and how nation-states may interact.
     The world is organized politically into nation-states; each nation-state claims sovereignty over a defined
     territory and jurisdiction and everyone in it; these nation-states interact with one another using formal
     agreements and sanctions, which may be peaceful or may involve the use of force.
     7 – C3.6.1      Define the characteristics of a nation-state (a specific territory, clearly defined boundaries,
                     citizens, and jurisdiction over people who reside there, laws, and government) and how Eastern
                     Hemisphere nations interact.


C4   RELATIONSHIP OF UNITED STATES TO OTHER NATIONS
     AND WORLD AFFAIRS
     Explain that nations interact with one another through trade, diplomacy, treaties and agreements, humanitarian aid,
     economic sanctions and incentives, and military force and threat of force.

C4.3 Conflict and Cooperation Between and Among Nations
     Explain the various ways that nations interact both positively and negatively.
     Governmental and nongovernmental organizations provide avenues through which nation-states can interact
     and attempt to manage their affairs and conflicts peacefully.




8   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                  V. 12/07        MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                 Grade Seven

       7 – C4.3.1     Explain how governments address national issues and form policies, and how the policies may
                      not be consistent with those of other countries (e.g., population pressures in China compared to
                      Sweden; international immigration quotas, international aid, energy needs for natural gas and oil
                      and military aid).
       7 – C4.3.2     Explain the challenges to governments and the cooperation needed to address international
                      issues (e.g., migration and human rights).
       7 – C4.3.3     Explain why governments belong to different types of international and regional organizations
                      (e.g., United Nations (UN), North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Organization of the
                      Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), European Union (EU), and African Union (AU), G-8
                      countries (leading economic/political)).


ECONOMICS
E1     THE MARKET ECONOMy
       Describe the market economy in terms of the relevance of limited resources, how individuals and institutions
       make and evaluate decisions, the role of incentives, how buyers and sellers interact to create markets, how markets
       allocate resources, and the economic role of government in a market economy.

E1.1 Individual, Business, and Government Choices
       Describe how individuals, businesses, and governments make economic decisions when confronting scarcity in the market
       economy.
       Individuals, businesses, industries, and governments confront scarcity and choice when organizing, producing and
       using productive resources (land, labor, capital) to supply the market place.
       7 – E1.1.1     Explain the role of incentives in different economic systems (acquiring money, profit, goods,
                      wanting to avoid loss, position in society, job placement).
       7 – E1.1.2     Describe the circular flow model (that businesses get money from households in exchange
                      for goods and services and return that money to households by paying for the factors of
                      production that households have to sell) and apply it to a public service (e.g., education, health
                      care, military protection).




 GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                9
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                               Grade Seven

E2   THE NATIONAL ECONOMy
     Use economic concepts, terminology, and data to identify and describe how a national economy functions.
     They study the role of government as a provider of goods and services within a national economy.

E2.3 Role of Government
     Describe how national governments make decisions that affect the national economy.
     Governmental decisions on taxation, spending, protections, and regulation affect the national economy.
     7 – E2.3.1     Explain how national governments make decisions that impact both that country and other
                    countries that use its resources (e.g., sanctions and tariffs enacted by a national government
                    to prevent imports, most favored trade agreements, the impact China is having on the global
                    economy and the U.S. economy in particular).


E3   INTERNATIONAL ECONOMy
     Analyze reasons for individuals and businesses to specialize and trade, why individuals and businesses trade across
     international borders, and the comparisons of the benefits and costs of specialization and the resulting trade for
     consumers, producers, and governments.

E3.1 Economic Interdependence
     Describe patterns and networks of economic interdependence, including trade.
     Economic interdependence (trade) and economic development result in challenges and benefits for individuals,
     producers, and governments.
     7 – E3.1.1     Explain the importance of trade (imports and exports) on national economies in the Eastern
                    Hemisphere (e.g., natural gas in North Africa, petroleum Africa, mineral resources in Asia).
     7 – E3.1.2     Diagram or map the movement of a consumer product from where it is manufactured to where
                    it is sold to demonstrate the flow of materials, labor, and capital (e.g., global supply chain for
                    computers, athletic shoes, and clothing).
     7 – E3.1.3     Determine the impact of trade on a region of the Eastern Hemisphere by graphing and analyzing
                    the gross Domestic Product of the region for the past decade and comparing the data with
                    trend data on the total value of imports and exports over the same period.
     7 – E3.1.4     Explain how communications innovations have affected economic interactions and where
                    and how people work (e.g., internet home offices, international work teams, international
                    companies).

E3.3 Economic Systems
     Describe how societies organize to allocate resources to produce and distribute goods and services.
     An economic system is the institutional framework that a society uses to allocate its resources to produce and
     distribute goods and services. Every modern economy is a “mixed system,” having some features characteristic
     of traditional, command, and market economies.The “mix” varies from one economy to another.
     7 – E3.3.1     Explain and compare how economic systems (traditional, command, and market) answer four
                    basic questions:What should be produced? How will it be produced? How will it be distributed?
                    Who will receive the benefits of production? (e.g., market economies in Africa, Europe; command
                    economy in North Korea; and the transition to market economies in Vietnam and China).




70   GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                             Grade Seven


PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)

P3.1   Identifying and Analyzing Issues, Decision Making, Persuasive Communication
       About a Public Issue, and Citizen Involvement

       7 – P3.1.1      Clearly state an issue as a question or public policy, trace the origins of an issue, analyze and
                       synthesize various perspectives, and generate and evaluate alternative resolutions. Deeply
                       examine policy issues in group discussions and debates to make reasoned and informed
                       decisions.Write persuasive/argumentative essays expressing and justifying decisions on public
                       policy issues. Plan and conduct activities intended to advance views on matters of public policy,
                       report the results, and evaluate effectiveness.
                       • Identify public policy issues related to global topics and issues studied.
                       • Clearly state the issue as a question of public policy orally or in written form.
                       • Use inquiry methods to acquire content knowledge and appropriate data about the issue.
                       • Identify the causes and consequences and analyze the impact, both positive and negative.
                       • Share and discuss findings of research and issue analysis in group discussions and debates.
                       • Compose a persuasive essay justifying the position with a reasoned argument.
                       • Develop an action plan to address or inform others about the issue at the local to global scales.

P4.2   Citizen Involvement
       Act constructively to further the public good.
       7 – P4.2.1      Demonstrate knowledge of how, when, and where individuals would plan and conduct
                       activities intended to advance views in matters of public policy, report the results, and evaluate
                       effectiveness.
       7 – P4.2.2      Engage in activities intended to contribute to solving a national or international problem studied.
       7 – P4.2.3      Participate in projects to help or inform others (e.g., service learning projects).




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION             71
     Integrated United States History                                                         Grade Eight
Eighth grade students continue their study of United States History from the writing of the Constitution through
Reconstruction. Geographic, civics/government, and economics content is integrated within the historical context.
Using significant content knowledge, research, and inquiry, the students analyze an issue and propose a plan for civic
action.They develop reasoned arguments and write a persuasive civic essay addressing issues from the past within a
historical context.Where appropriate, they make comparisons to relevant contemporary issues.

     INTEGRATED* UNITED STATES HISTORy, ORGANIzED By ERA (USHG)
     Eras 1-3 Addressed in 5th Grade
     Eras 3-5 Addressed in 8th Grade
     USHG ERA 1 – Beginnings to 1620 (Grade 5)
     1.1   American Indian Life in the Americas1
     1.2   European Exploration and Conquest
     1.3   Three World Interactions
     USHG ERA 2 - Colonization and Settlement (1585-1763) (Grade 5)
     2.1   Struggle for Control of North America
     2.2   Slave Trade and Origins of Black America
     2.3   Life in Colonial America

     USHG ERA 3 – REVOLUTION AND THE NEW NATION (1754-1800s)
     3.1   Causes of the American Revolution (Grade 5)
     3.2   The American Revolution and Its Consequences (Grade 5)

     Foundational Issues in USHG Eras 1-3 (Review of Grade 5 Social Studies)
     F1    Political and Intellectual Transformations
     F2    Geographic, Economic, Social, and Demographic Trends in America

     USHG ERA 3 – REVOLUTION AND THE NEW NATION (1754-1800s)
     3.3   Creating New Government(s) and a New Constitution (introduced in Grade 5; begins Grade 8 expectations)

     USHG ERA 4 – ExPANSION AND REFORM (1792-1861)
     4.1   Challenges to an Emerging Nation
     4.2   Regional and Economic Growth
     4.3   Reform Movements
     USHG ERA 5 – Civil War and Reconstruction (1850-1877)
     5.1   The Coming of Civil War
     5.2   Civil War
     5.3   Reconstruction
     USHG ERA 6 – THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN INDUSTRIAL, URBAN, AND GLOBAL
     UNITED STATES (1870 – 1898 in Grade 8)
     6.1   America in the last half of the 19th Century (introduced in Grade 8; begins high school USHG)
     6.2   Policy Issues in USHG Eras 3-6 (P2)
     1
      Note: U.S. historians, history books, history standards, and the peoples themselves have used, at one time
     or another, “Native American” and “American Indian,” while Canadian history uses “First Peoples” to refer to
     inhabitants of North America prior to European exploration, conquest, and settlement.While we are using
     American Indians throughout the content expectations, students should be familiar with the different names
     and specific tribal identities as they will likely encounter variations over the course of their studies.

     *Geography, Civics and Government, and Economics are integrated into the historical context.
     National Geography Standards are listed on p. 35 and are referenced after expectations where appropriate.

7         GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS            V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
  Social Studies Content Expectations                                                            Grade Eight

FOUNDATIONS IN UNITED STATES HISTORy AND GEOGRAPHy ERAS 1-3
These foundational expectations are included to help students draw upon their previous study of American history
and connect 8th grade United States history with the history studied in 5th grade.
To set the stage for the study of U.S. history that begins with the creation of the U.S. Constitution, students should
be able to draw upon an understanding of these politics and intellectual understandings.


F1      POLITICAL AND INTELLECTUAL TRANSFORMATIONS

F1.1 Describe the ideas, experiences, and interactions that influenced the colonists’
     decisions to declare independence by analyzing
        • colonial ideas about government (e.g., limited government, republicanism, protecting individual rights and
          promoting the common good, representative government, natural rights) (C2)
        • experiences with self-government (e.g., House of Burgesses and town meetings) (C2)
        • changing interactions with the royal government of Great Britain after the French and Indian War (C2)

F1.2 Using the Declaration of Independence, including the grievances at the end of the
     document, describe the role this document played in expressing
        • colonists’ views of government
        • their reasons for separating from Great Britain. (C2)

F1.3 Describe the consequences of the American Revolution by analyzing the
        • birth of an independent republican government (C2)
        • creation of Articles of Confederation (C2)
        • changing views on freedom and equality (C2)
        • and concerns over distribution of power within governments, between government and the governed,
          and among people (C2)




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION            7
     Integrated United States History                                                         Grade Eight

U3     USHG ERA 3 – REVOLUTION AND THE NEW NATION

U3.3 Creating New Government(s) and a New Constitution
       Explain the challenges faced by the new nation and analyze the development of the Constitution as a new plan for
       governing. [Foundations for Civics HSCE Standard 2.2.]
       Note: Expectations U3.3.1–U3.3.5 address content that was introduced in Grade 5, but ask for explanation and
       analysis at a higher level than expected in Grade 5.They are included here to support in-depth discussion of
       the historical and philosophical origins of constitutional government in the United States. (U3.3.6)
       8 – U3.3.1     Explain the reasons for the adoption and subsequent failure of the Articles of
                      Confederation (e.g., why its drafters created a weak central government, challenges the nation
                      faced under the Articles, Shays’ Rebellion, disputes over western lands). (C2)
       8 – U3.3.2     Identify economic and political questions facing the nation during the period of the Articles of
                      Confederation and the opening of the Constitutional Convention. (E1.4)
       8 – U3.3.3     Describe the major issues debated at the Constitutional Convention including the distribution
                      of political power, conduct of foreign affairs, rights of individuals, rights of states, election of the
                      executive, and slavery as a regional and federal issue.
       8 – U3.3.4     Explain how the new constitution resolved (or compromised) the major issues including sharing,
                      separating, and checking of power among federal government institutions, dual sovereignty
                      (state-federal power), rights of individuals, the Electoral College, the Three-Fifths Compromise,
                      and the Great Compromise.
       8 – U3.3.5     Analyze the debates over the ratification of the Constitution from the perspectives of
                      Federalists and Anti-Federalists and describe how the states ratified the Constitution. (C2)
                      (National Geography Standard 3, p. 148)
       8 – U3.3.6     Explain how the Bill of Rights reflected the concept of limited government, protections of basic
                      freedoms, and the fear of many Americans of a strong central government. (C3)
       8 – U3.3.7     Using important documents (e.g., Mayflower Compact, Iroquois Confederacy, Common Sense,
                      Declaration of Independence, Northwest Ordinance, Federalist Papers), describe the historical
                      and philosophical origins of constitutional government in the United States using the ideas of
                      social compact, limited government, natural rights, right of revolution, separation of powers,
                      bicameralism, republicanism, and popular participation in government. (C2)

U4     USHG ERA 4 – ExPANSION AND REFORM (1792-1861)
U4.1 Challenges to an Emerging Nation
       Analyze the challenges the new government faced and the role of political and social leaders in meeting these
       challenges.
       8 – U4.1.1     Washington’s Farewell – Use Washington’s Farewell Address to analyze the most significant
                      challenges the new nation faced and the extent to which subsequent Presidents heeded
                      Washington’s advice. (C4)
       8 – U4.1.2     Establishing America’s Place in the World – Explain the changes in America’s relationships
                      with other nations by analyzing treaties with American Indian nations, Jay’s Treaty (1795), French
                      Revolution, Pinckney’s Treaty (1795), Louisiana Purchase,War of 1812,Transcontinental Treaty
                      (1819), and the Monroe Doctrine. (C4) (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169)




7     GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                 Grade Eight

      8 – U4.1.3     Challenge of Political Conflict – Explain how political parties emerged out of the competing
                     ideas, experiences, and fears of Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton (and their followers),
                     despite the worries the Founders had concerning the dangers of political division, by analyzing
                     disagreements over
                     • relative power of the national government (e.g.,Whiskey Rebellion, Alien and Sedition Acts)
                         and of the executive branch (e.g., during the Jacksonian era)
                         (C3) (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169)
                     • foreign relations (e.g., French Revolution, relations with Great Britain) (C3)
                         (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169)
                     • economic policy (e.g., the creation of a national bank, assumption of revolutionary debt)
                         (C3, E2.2)
      8 – U4.1.4     Establishing a National Judiciary and Its Power – Explain the development of the
                     power of the Supreme Court through the doctrine of judicial review as manifested in
                     Marbury v. Madison (1803) and the role of Chief Justice John Marshall and the Supreme
                     Court in interpreting the power of the national government (e.g., McCullouch v. Maryland,
                     Dartmouth College v. Woodward, Gibbons v. Ogden). (C3, E1.4, 2.2)

U4.2 Regional and Economic Growth
      Describe and analyze the nature and impact of the territorial, demographic, and economic growth in the first three
      decades of the new nation using maps, charts, and other evidence.
      8 – U4.2.1     Comparing Northeast and the South – Compare and contrast the social and economic
                     systems of the Northeast and the South with respect to geography and climate and the
                     development of
                     • agriculture, including changes in productivity, technology, supply and demand, and price
                         (E1.3,1.4) (National Geography Standard 14, p. 171)
                     • industry, including entrepreneurial development of new industries, such as textiles (E1.1)
                     • the labor force including labor incentives and changes in labor forces (E1.2)
                     • transportation including changes in transportation (steamboats and canal barges) and impact
                         on economic markets and prices (E1.2,1.3) (National Geography Standard 3, p. 148)
                     • immigration and the growth of nativism (National Geography Standard 9, p. 160)
                     • race relations
                     • class relations
      8 – U4.2.2      The Institution of Slavery – Explain the ideology of the institution of slavery, its policies, and
                     consequences.
      8 – U4.2.3     Westward Expansion – Explain the expansion, conquest, and settlement of the West through
                     the Louisiana Purchase, the removal of American Indians (Trail of Tears) from their native lands,
                     the growth of a system of commercial agriculture, the Mexican-American War, and the idea of
                     Manifest Destiny. (E2.1) (National Geography Standard 6, p. 154)
      8 – U4.2.4     Consequences of Expansion – Develop an argument based on evidence about the
                     positive and negative consequences of territorial and economic expansion on American Indians,
                     the institution of slavery, and the relations between free and slaveholding states. (C2)
                     (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169)




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION                7
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                                               Grade Eight

U4.3 Reform Movements
        Analyze the growth of antebellum American reform movements.
        8 – U4.3.1     Explain the origins of the American education system and Horace Mann’s campaign for free
                       compulsory public education. (C2)
        8 – U4.3.2     Describe the formation and development of the abolitionist movement by considering the roles
                       of key abolitionist leaders (e.g., John Brown and the armed resistance, Harriet Tubman and the
                       Underground Railroad, Sojourner Truth,William Lloyd Garrison, and Frederick Douglass), and the
                       response of southerners and northerners to the abolitionist movement. (C2)
                       (National Geography Standard 6, p. 154)
        8 – U4.3.3     Analyze the antebellum women’s rights (and suffrage) movement by discussing the goals of its
                       leaders (e.g., Susan B.Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton) and comparing the Seneca Falls
                       Resolution with the Declaration of Independence. (C2)
        8 – U4.3.4     Analyze the goals and effects of the antebellum temperance movement. (C2)
        8 – U4.3.5     Evaluate the role of religion in shaping antebellum reform movements. (C2)


U5      USHG ERA 5 – CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION (1850-1877)

U5.1 The Coming of the Civil War
        Analyze and evaluate the early attempts to abolish or contain slavery and to realize the ideals of the Declaration of
        Independence.
        8 – U5.1.1     Explain the differences in the lives of free blacks (including those who escaped from slavery)
                       with the lives of free whites and enslaved peoples. (C2)
        8 – U5.1.2     Describe the role of the Northwest Ordinance and its effect on the banning of slavery (e.g., the
                       establishment of Michigan as a free state). (National Geography Standard 12, p. 167)
        8 – U5.1.3     Describe the competing views of Calhoun,Webster, and Clay on the nature of the union among
                       the states (e.g., sectionalism, nationalism, federalism, state rights). (C3)
        8 – U5.1.4     Describe how the following increased sectional tensions
                       •   the Missouri Compromise (1820)
                       •   the Wilmot Proviso (1846)
                       •   the Compromise of 1850 including the Fugitive Slave Act
                       •   the Kansas-Nebraska Act (1854) and subsequent conflict in Kansas
                       •   the Dred Scott v. Sandford decision (1857)
                       •   changes in the party system (e.g., the death of the Whig party, rise of the Republican party
                           and division of the Democratic party)
                       (C2; C3) (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169)
        8 – U5.1.5     Describe the resistance of enslaved people (e.g., Nat Turner, Harriet Tubman and the
                       Underground Railroad, John Brown, Michigan’s role in the Underground Railroad) and effects of
                       their actions before and during the Civil War. (C2)
        8 – U5.1.6     Describe how major issues debated at the Constitutional Convention such as disagreements
                       over the distribution of political power, rights of individuals (liberty and property), rights of
                       states, election of the executive, and slavery help explain the Civil War.
                       (C2) (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169)




7      GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                             Grade Eight

U5.2 Civil War
      Evaluate the multiple causes, key events, and complex consequences of the Civil War.
      8 – U5.2.1     Explain the reasons (political, economic, and social) why Southern states seceded and explain the
                     differences in the timing of secession in the Upper and Lower South. (C3, E1.2)
                     (National Geography Standard 6, p. 154)
      8 – U5.2.2     Make an argument to explain the reasons why the North won the Civil War by considering the
                     • critical events and battles in the war
                     • the political and military leadership of the North and South
                     • the respective advantages and disadvantages, including geographic, demographic, economic
                          and technological (E1.4) (National Geography Standard 15, p. 173)
      8 – U5.2.3     Examine Abraham Lincoln’s presidency with respect to
                     • his military and political leadership
                     • the evolution of his emancipation policy (including the Emancipation Proclamation)
                     • and the role of his significant writings and speeches, including the Gettysburg Address and
                          its relationship to the Declaration of Independence (C2)
      8 – U5.2.4     Describe the role of African Americans in the war, including black soldiers and regiments, and
                     the increased resistance of enslaved peoples.
      8 – U5.2.5     Construct generalizations about how the war affected combatants, civilians (including the
                     role of women), the physical environment, and the future of warfare, including technological
                     developments. (National Geography Standard 14, p. 171)

U5.3 Reconstruction
      Using evidence, develop an argument regarding the character and consequences of Reconstruction.
      8 – U5.3.1     Describe the different positions concerning the reconstruction of Southern society and the
                     nation, including the positions of President Abraham Lincoln, President Andrew Johnson,
                     Republicans, and African Americans.
      8 – U5.3.2     Describe the early responses to the end of the Civil War by describing the
                     • policies of the Freedmen’s Bureau (E2.2)
                     • restrictions placed on the rights and opportunities of freedmen, including racial segregation
                         and Black Codes (C2, C5)
      8 – U5.3.3     Describe the new role of African Americans in local, state and federal government in the years after
                     the Civil War and the resistance of Southern whites to this change, including the Ku Klux Klan.
                     (C2, C5) (National Geography Standard 10, p. 162)
      8 – U5.3.4     Analyze the intent and the effect of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to
                     the Constitution.
      8 – U5.3.5     Explain the decision to remove Union troops in 1877 and describe its impact on Americans.




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS              V. 12/07      MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION            77
     Social Studies Content Expectations                                                                    Grade Eight


U6      USHG ERA 6 – THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN INDUSTRIAL, URBAN,
        AND GLOBAL UNITED STATES (1870-1930)
        Grade 8 begins to address trends and patterns in the last half of the 19th century, through 1898.

U6.1 America in the Last Half of the 19th Century
        Analyze the major changes in communication, transportation, demography, and urban centers, including the location
        and growth of cities linked by industry and trade, in last half of the 19th century. The purpose of this section is
        to introduce some of the major changes in American society and the economy in the last part of the 19th
        Century.This era will be addressed in-depth and with greater intellectual sophistication in the high school
        United History and Geography content expectations.
        8 – U6.1.1      America at Century’s End – Compare and contrast the United States in 1800 with the United
                        States in 1898 focusing on similarities and differences in
                        • territory, including the size of the United States and land use
                            (National Geography Standards 1and 16, pp. 144 and 196)
                        • population, including immigration, reactions to immigrants, and the changing demographic
                            structure of rural and urban America
                            (E3.2) (National Geography Standards 9 and 12, pp. 160 and 167)
                        • systems of transportation (canals and railroads, including the Transcontinental Railroad), and
                            their impact on the economy and society (E1.4, 3.2) (National Geography Standard 11, p. 164)
                        • governmental policies promoting economic development (e.g., tariffs, banking, land grants and
                            mineral rights, the Homestead Act) (E.2.2) (National Geography Standard 16, p. 176)
                        • economic change, including industrialization, increased global competition, and their impact
                            on conditions of farmers and industrial workers
                            (E1.4, 2.1, 3.2) (National Geography Standard 11, p. 164)
                        • the treatment of African Americans, including the rise of segregation in the South as
                            endorsed by the Supreme Court’s decision in Plessy v. Ferguson, and the response of African
                            Americans
                        • the policies toward American Indians, including removal, reservations, the Dawes Act of 1887,
                            and the response of American Indians (National Geography Standard 13, p. 169)

U6.2 Investigation Topics and Issue Analysis (P2)
        Use the historical perspective to investigate a significant historical topic from United States History Eras 3-6 that also
        has significance as an issue or topic in the United States today.
        8 – U6.2.1      United States History Investigation Topic and Issue Analysis, Past and Present –
                        Use historical perspectives to analyze issues in the United States from the past and the present;
                        conduct research on a historical issue or topic, identify a connection to a contemporary issue,
                        and present findings (e.g., oral, visual, video, or electronic presentation, persuasive essay, or research
                        paper); include causes and consequences of the historical action and predict possible consequences
                        of the contemporary action. (National Geography Standards 9 and 10, pp. 160 and 162)




78      GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS                  V. 12/07       MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
 Social Studies Content Expectations                                                              Grade Eight

       Examples of Investigation Topics and Questions (and examples from United States History)
                       Balance of Power – How has the nation addressed tensions between state and federal
                       governmental power? (e.g.,Articles of Confederation, U.S. Constitution, states’ rights issues,
                       secession, others)
                       Liberty vs. Security – How has the nation balanced liberty interests with security interests?
                       (e.g.,Alien and Sedition Acts, suspension of habeas corpus during the Civil War)
                       The Government and Social Change – How have governmental policies, the actions of
                       reformers, and economic and demographic changes affected social change? (e.g., abolitionist
                       movement, women’s movement, Reconstruction policies)
                       Movement of People – How has the nation addressed the movement of people into and
                       within the United States? (e.g.,American Indians, immigrants)


PUBLIC DISCOURSE, DECISION MAKING, AND CITIZEN INVOLVEMENT (P3, P4)

P3.1   Identifying and Analyzing Issues, Decision Making, Persuasive Communication
       About a Public Issue, and Citizen Involvement

       8 – P3.1.1       Identify, research, analyze, discuss, and defend a position on a national public policy issue.
                       • Identify a national public policy issue.
                       • Clearly state the issue as a question of public policy orally or in written form.
                       • Use inquiry methods to trace the origins of the issue and to acquire data about the issue.
                       • Generate and evaluate alternative resolutions to the public issue and analyze various
                           perspectives (causes, consequences, positive and negative impact) on the issue.
                       • Identify and apply core democratic values or constitutional principles.
                       • Share and discuss findings of research and issue analysis in group discussions and debates.
                       • Compose a persuasive essay justifying the position with a reasoned argument.
                       • Develop an action plan to address or inform others about the issue

P4.2   Citizen Involvement
       Act constructively to further the public good.
       8 – P4.2.1      Demonstrate knowledge of how, when, and where individuals would plan and conduct
                       activities intended to advance views in matters of public policy, report the results, and evaluate
                       effectiveness.
       8 – P4.2.2      Engage in activities intended to contribute to solving a national or international problem
                       studied.
       8 – P4.2.3      Participate in projects to help or inform others (e.g., service learning projects).




GRADES K-8 SOCIAL STUDIES CONTENT EXPECTATIONS               V. 12/07     MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION               79
                                                       Michigan
                                                     State Board
                                                     of Education
                                                       Kathleen N. Straus
                                                           President
                                                       Bloomfield Township

                                                          John C.Austin
                                                          Vice President
                                                             Ann Arbor

                                                        Carolyn L. Curtin
                                                           Secretary
                                                              Evart

                                                   Marianne Yared McGuire
                                                         Treasurer
                                                           Detroit

                                                         Nancy Danhof
                                                        NASBE Delegate
                                                          East Lansing

                                                       Elizabeth W. Bauer
                                                            Birmingham

                                                       Reginald M.Turner
                                                            Detroit

                                                      Casandra E. Ulbrich
                                                           Rochester Hills


                                                   Gov. Jennifer M. Granholm
                                                            Ex Officio

                                                       Michael P. Flanagan
                                                             Chairman
                                                  Superintendent of Public Instruction
                                                              Ex Officio




                                                          MDE Staff
                                                       Sally Vaughn, Ph.D.
                                                       Deputy Superintendent /
                                                        Chief Academic Officer

                                                        Betty Underwood
Michigan Department of Education                         Interim Director
                                                    Office of School Improvement
Office of School Improvement
Betty Underwood, Interim Director
p: (517) 241-3147 website: www.michigan.gov/mde
